A MINOR PROPHET.


IHAVE a friend, a vegetarian seer,
By name Elias Baptist Butterworth,
A harmless, bland, disinterested man,
Whose ancestors in Cromwell's day believed
The Second Advent certain in five years,
But when King Charles the Second came instead,
Revised their date and sought another world:
I mean—not heaven but—America.
A fervid stock, whose generous hope embraced
The fortunes of mankind, not stopping short
At rise of leather, or the fall of gold,
Nor listening to the voices of the time
As housewives listen to a cackling hen,
With wonder whether she has laid her egg
On their own nest-egg. Still they did insist
Somewhat too wearisomely on the joys
Of their Millennium, when coats and hats
Would all be of one pattern, books and songs
All fit for Sundays, and the casual talk
As good as sermons preached extempore.


And in Elias the ancestral zeal
Breathes strong as ever, only modified
By Transatlantic air and modern thought.
You could not pass him in the street and fail
To note his shoulders' long declivity.
Beard to the waist, swan-neck, and large pale eyes;
Or, when he lifts his hat, to mark his hair
Brushed back to show his great capacity—
A full grain's length at the angle of the brow
Proving him witty, while the shallower men
Only seem witty in their repartees.
Not that he 's vain, but that his doctrine needs
The testimony of his frontal lobe.


On all points he adopts the latest views;
Takes for the key of universal Mind
The "levitation" of stout gentlemen;
Believes the Rappings are not spirits' work,
But the Thought-atmosphere's, a stream of brains
In correlated force of raps, as proved
By motion, heat, and science generally;
The spectrum, for example, which has shown
The selfsame metals in the sun as here;
So the Thought-atmosphere is everywhere:
High truths that glimmered under other names
To ancient sages, whence good scholarship
Applied to Eleusinian mysteries—
The Vedas—Tripitaka—Vendidad—
Might furnish weaker proof for weaker minds
That Thought was rapping in the hoary past,
And might have edified the Greeks by raps
At the greater Dionysia, if their ears
Had not been filled with Sophoclean verse.
And when all Earth is vegetarian—
When, lacking butchers, quadrupeds die out,
And less Thought-atmosphere is reabsorbed
By nerves of insects parasitical,
Those higher truths, seized now by higher minds
But not expressed (the insects hindering),
Will either flash out into eloquence.
Or better still, be comprehensible
By rappings simply, without need of roots.
'T is on this theme—the vegetarian world—
That good Elias willingly expands:
He loves to tell in mildly nasal tones
And vowels stretched to suit the widest views,
The future fortunes of our infant Earth—
When it will be too full of human kind
To have the room for wilder animals.
Saith he, Sahara will be populous
With families of gentlemen retired
From commerce in more Central Africa,
Who order coolness as we order coal.
And have a lobe anterior strong enough
To think away the sand-storms. Science thus
Will leave no spot on this terraqueous globe
Unfit to be inhabited by man.
The chief of animals: all meaner brutes
Will have been smoked and elbowed out of life.
No lions then shall lap Caffrarian pools,
Or shake the Atlas with their midnight roar:
Even the slow, slime-loving crocodile,
The last of animals to take a hint,
Will then retire forever from a scene
Where public feeling strongly sets against him.
Fishes may lead carnivorous lives obscure,
But must not dream of culinary rank
Or being dished in good society.
Imagination in that distant age,
Aiming at fiction called historical,
Will vainly try to reconstruct the times
When it was men's preposterous delight
To sit astride live horses, which consumed
Materials for incalculable cakes;
When there were milkmaids who drew milk from cows
With udders kept abnormal for that end
Since the rude mythopœic period
Of Aryan dairymen, who did not blush
To call their milkmaid and their daughter one—
Helplessly gazing at the Milky Way,
Nor dreaming of the astral cocoa-nuts
Quite at the service of posterity.
'T is to be feared, though, that the duller boys,
Much given to anachronisms and nuts
(Elias has confessed boys will be boys),
May write a jockey for a centaur, think
Europa's suitor was an Irish bull,
Æsop a journalist who wrote up Fox,
And Bruin a chief swindler upon 'Change.
Boys will be boys, but dogs will all be moral,
With longer alimentary canals
Suited to diet vegetarian.
The uglier breeds will fade from memory,
Or, being palæontological,
Live but as portraits in large learned books,
Distasteful to the feelings of an age
Nourished on purest beauty. Earth will hold
No stupid brutes, no cheerful queernesses,
No naïve cunning, grave absurdity.
Wart-pigs with tender and parental grunts,
Wombats much flattened as to their contour,
Perhaps from too much crushing in the ark,
But taking meekly that fatality;
The serious cranes, unstung by ridicule;
Long-headed, short-legged, solemn-looking curs,
(Wise, silent critics of a flippant age);
The silly straddling foals, the weak-brained geese
Hissing fallaciously at sound of wheels—
All these rude products will have disappeared
Along with every faulty human type.
By dint of diet vegetarian
All will be harmony of hue and line,
Bodies and minds all perfect, limbs well-turned,
And talk quite free from aught erroneous.


Thus far Elias in his seer's mantle:
But at this climax in his prophecy
My sinking spirits, fearing to be swamped,
Urge me to speak. "High prospects these, my friend,
Setting the weak carnivorous brain astretch;
We will resume the thread another day."
"To-morrow," cries Elias, "at this hour?"
"No, not to-morrow—I shall have a cold—
At least I feel some soreness—this endemic—
Good-by."


⁠⁠No tears are sadder than the smile
With which I quit Elias. Bitterly
I feel that every change upon this earth
Is bought with sacrifice. My yearnings fail
To reach that high apocalyptic mount
Which shows in bird's-eye view a perfect world,
Or enter warmly into other joys
Than those of faulty, struggling human kind.
That strain upon my soul's too feeble wing
Ends in ignoble floundering: I fall
Into short-sighted pity for the men
Who living in those perfect future times
Will not know half the dear imperfect things
That move my smiles and tears—will never know
The fine old incongruities that raise
My friendly laugh; the innocent conceits
That like a needless eyeglass or black patch
Give those who wear them harmless happiness;
The twists and cracks in our poor earthenware,
That touch me to more conscious fellowship
(I am not myself the finest Parian)
With my coevals. So poor Colin Clout,
To whom raw onion gives prospective zest,
Consoling hours of dampest wintry work,
Could hardly fancy any regal joys
Quite unimpregnate with the onion's scent:
Perhaps his highest hopes are not all clear
Of waftings from that energetic bulb:
'T is well that onion is not heresy.
Speaking in parable, I am Colin Clout.
A clinging flavor penetrates my life —
My onion is imperfectness: I cleave
To nature's blunders, evanescent types
Which sages banish from Utopia.
"Not worship beauty?" say you. Patience, friend!
I worship in the temple with the rest;
But by my hearth I keep a sacred nook
For gnomes and dwarfs, duck-footed waddling elves
Who stitched and hammered for the weary man
In days of old. And in that piety
I clothe ungainly forms inherited
From toiling generations, daily bent
At desk, or plough, or loom, or in the mine,
In pioneering labors for the world.
Nay, I am apt when floundering confused
From too rash flight, to grasp at paradox,
And pity future men who will not know
A keen experience with pity blent,
The pathos exquisite of lovely minds
Hid in harsh forms—not penetrating them
Like fire divine within a common bush
Which glows transfigured by the heavenly guest,
So that men put their shoes off; but encaged
Like a sweet child within some thick-walled cell,
Who leaps and fails to hold the window-bars,
But having shown a little dimpled hand
Is visited thenceforth by tender hearts
Whose eyes keep watch about the prison walls.
A foolish, nay, a wicked paradox!
For purest pity is the eye of love
Melting at sight of sorrow; and to grieve
Because it sees no sorrow, shows a love
Warped from its truer nature, turned to love
Of merest habit, like the miser's greed.
But I am Colin still: my prejudice
Is for the flavor of my daily food.
Not that I doubt the world is growing still
As once it grew from Chaos and from Night;
Or have a soul too shrunken for the hope
Which dawned in human breasts, a double morn,
With earliest watchings of the rising light
Chasing the darkness; and through many an age
Has raised the vision of a future time
That stands an Angel with a face all mild
Spearing the demon. I too rest in faith
That man's perfection is the crowning flower,
Toward which the urgent sap in life's great tree
Is pressing—seen in puny blossoms now.
But in the world's great morrows to expand
With broadest petal and with deepest glow.


Yet, see the patched and plodding citizen
Waiting upon the pavement with the throng
While some victorious world-hero makes
Triumphal entry, and the peal of shouts
And flash of faces 'neath uplifted hats
Run like a storm of joy along the streets!
He says, "God bless him!" almost with a sob,
As the great hero passes; he is glad
The world holds mighty men and mighty deeds;
The music stirs his pulses like strong wine,
The moving splendor touches him with awe—
'T is glory shed around the common weal,
And he will pay his tribute willingly,
Though with the pennies earned by sordid toil.
Perhaps the hero's deeds have helped to bring
A time when every honest citizen
Shall wear a coat unpatched. And yet he feels
More easy fellowship with neighbors there
Who look on too; and he will soon relapse
From noticing the banners and the steeds
To think with pleasure there is just one bun
Left in his pocket, that may serve to tempt
The wide-eyed lad, whose weight is all too much
For that young mother's arms: and then he falls
To dreamy picturing of sunny days
When he himself was a small big-cheeked lad
In some far village where no heroes came,
And stood a listener 'twixt his father's legs
In the warm firelight, while the old folk talked
And shook their heads and looked upon the floor;
And he was puzzled, thinking life was fine—
The bread and cheese so nice all through the year
And Christmas sure to come. Oh that good time!
He, could he choose, would have those days again
And see the dear old-fashioned things once more.
But soon the wheels and drums have all passed by
And tramping feet are heard like sudden rain:
The quiet startles our good citizen;
He feels the child upon his arms, and knows
He is with the people making holiday
Because of hopes for better days to come.
But Hope to him was like the brilliant west
Telling of sunrise in a world unknown,
And from that dazzling curtain of bright hues
He turned to the familiar face of fields
Lying all clear in the calm morning land.
Maybe 't is wiser not to fix a lens
Too scrutinizing on the glorious times
When Barbarossa shall arise and shake
His mountain, good King Arthur come again,
And all the heroes of such giant soul
That, living once to cheer mankind with hope,
They had to sleep until the time was ripe
For greater deeds to match their greater thought.
Yet no! the earth yields nothing more Divine
Than high prophetic vision—than the Seer
Who fasting from man's meaner joy beholds
The paths of beauteous order, and constructs
A fairer type, to shame our low content.
But prophecy is like potential sound
Which turned to music seems a voice sublime
From out the soul of light; but turns to noise
In scrannel pipes, and makes all ears averse.


The faith that life on earth is being shaped
To glorious ends, that order, justice, love,
Mean man's completeness, mean effect as sure
As roundness in the dew-drop—that great faith
Is but the rushing and expanding stream
Of thought, of feeling, fed by all the past.
Our finest hope is finest memory,
As they who love in age think youth is blest
Because it has a life to fill with love.
Full souls are double mirrors, making still
An endless vista of fair things before
Repeating things behind: so faith is strong
Only when we are strong, shrinks when we shrink.
It comes when music stirs us, and the chords
Moving on some grand climax shake our souls
With influx new that makes new energies.
It comes in swellings of the heart and tears
That rise at noble and at gentle deeds—
At labors of the master-artist's hand
Which, trembling, touches to a finer end,
Trembling before an image seen within.
It comes in moments of heroic love,
Unjealous joy in joy not made for us—
In conscious triumph of the good within
Making us worship goodness that rebukes.
Even our failures are a prophecy,
Even our yearnings and our bitter tears
After that fair and true we cannot grasp;
As patriots who seem to die in vain
Make liberty more sacred by their pangs.


Presentiment of better things on earth
Sweeps in with every force that stirs our souls
To admiration, self-renouncing love,
Or thoughts, like light, that bind the world in one,—
Sweeps like the sense of vastness, when at night
We hear the roll and dash of waves that break
Nearer and nearer with the rushing tide,
Which rises to the level of the cliff
Because the wide Atlantic rolls behind,
Throbbing respondent to the far-off orbs.


1865


ARION.


(Herod, i. 24.)


ARION, whose melodic soul
Taught the dithyramb to roll
⁠Like forest fires, and sing
⁠Olympian suffering,


Had carried his diviner lore
From Corinth to the sister shore
⁠Where Greece could largelier be,
⁠Branching o'er Italy.


Then weighted with his glorious name
And bags of gold, aboard he came
⁠'Mid harsh seafaring men
⁠To Corinth bound again.


The sailors eyed the bags and thought;
"The gold is good, the man is naught-
⁠And who shall track the wave
⁠That opens for his grave?"


With brawny arms and cruel eyes
They press around him where he lies
⁠In sleep beside his lyre.
⁠Hearing the Muses quire.


He waked and saw this wolf-faced Death
Breaking the dream that filled his breath
⁠With inspiration strong
⁠Of yet unchanted song.


"Take, take my gold and let me live!"
He prayed, as kings do when they give
⁠Their all with royal will,
⁠Holding born kingship still.


To rob the living they refuse,
One death or other he must choose,
⁠Either the watery pall
⁠Or wounds and burial.


"My solemn robe then let me don,
Give me high space to stand upon,
⁠That dying I may pour
⁠A song unsung before."


It pleased them well to grant this prayer,
To hear for naught how it might fare
⁠With men who paid their gold
⁠For what a poet sold.


In flowing stole, his eyes aglow
With inward fire, he neared the prow
⁠And took his god-like stand,
⁠The cithara in hand.


The wolfish men all shrank aloof,
And feared this singer might be proof
⁠Against their murderous power,
⁠After his lyric hour.


But he, in liberty of song,
Fearless of death or other wrong,
⁠With full spondaic toll
⁠Poured forth his mighty soul:


Poured forth the strain his dream had taught,
A nome with lofty passion fraught
⁠Such as makes battles won
⁠On fields of Marathon.


The last long vowels trembled then
As awe within those wolfish men:
⁠They said, with mutual stare,
⁠Some god was present there.


But lo! Arion leaped on high,
Ready, his descant done, to die;
⁠Not asking, "Is it well?"
⁠Like a pierced eagle fell.


1873


COME with me to the mountain, not where rocks
Soar harsh above the troops of hurrying pines,
But where the earth spreads soft and rounded breasts
To feed her children; where the generous hills
Lift a green isle betwixt the sky and plain
To keep some Old World things aloof from change.
Here too 't is hill and hollow: new-born streams.
With sweet enforcement, joyously compelled
Like laughing children, hurry down the steeps,
And make a dimpled chase athwart the stones;
Pine woods are black upon the heights, the slopes
Are green with pasture, and the bearded corn
Fringes the blue above the sudden ridge:
A little world whose round horizon cuts
This isle of hills with heaven for a sea,
Save in clear moments when southwestward gleams
France by the Rhine, melting anon to haze.
The monks of old chose here their still retreat, .
And called it by the Blessed Virgin's name,
Sancta Maria, which the peasant's tongue,
Speaking from out the parent's heart that turns
All loved things into little things, has made
Sanct Märgen—Holy little Mary, dear
As all the sweet home things she smiles upon,
The children and the cows, the apple-trees,
The cart, the plough, all named with that caress
Which feigns them little, easy to be held,
Familiar to the eyes and hand and heart.
What though a Queen? She puts her crown away
And with her little Boy wears common clothes,
Caring for common wants, remembering
That day when good Saint Joseph left his work
To marry her with humble trust sublime.
The monks are gone, their shadows fall no more
Tall-frocked and cowled athwart the evening fields
At milking-time; their silent corridors
Are turned to homes of bare-armed, aproned men,
Who toil for wife and. children. But the bells,
Pealing on high from two quaint convent towers,
Still ring the Catholic signals, summoning
To grave remembrance of the larger life
That bears our own, like perishable fruit
Upon its heaven-wide branches. At their sound
The shepherd boy far off upon the hill,
The workers with the saw and at the forge,
The triple generation round the hearth—
Grandames and mothers and the flute-voiced girls —
Fall on their knees and send forth prayerful cries
To the kind Mother with the little Boy,
Who pleads for helpless men against the storm,
Lightning and plagues and all terrific shapes
Of power supreme.
Within the prettiest hollow of these hills.
Just as you enter it, upon the slope
Stands a low cottage neighbored cheerily
By running water, which, at farthest end
Of the same hollow, turns a heavy mill,
And feeds the pasture for the miller's cows,
Blanchi and Nägeli, Veilchen and the rest,
Matrons with faces as Griselda mild,
Coming at call. And on the farthest height
A little tower looks out above the pines
Where mounting you will find a sanctuary
Open and still; without, the silent crowd
Of heaven-planted, incense-mingling flowers;
Within, the altar where the Mother sits
'Mid votive tablets hung from far-off years
By peasants succored in the peril of fire,
Fever, or flood, who thought that Mary's love,
Willing but not omnipotent, had stood
Between their lives and that dread power which slew
Their neighbor at their side. The chapel bell
Will melt to gentlest music ere it reach
That cottage on the slope, whose garden gate
Has caught the rose-tree boughs and stands ajar;
So does the door, to let the sunbeams in;
For in the slanting sunbeams angels come
And visit Agatha who dwells within —
Old Agatha, whose cousins Kate and Nell
Are housed by her in Love and Duty's name,
They being feeble, with small withered wits,
And she believing that the higher gift
Was given to be shared. So Agatha
Shares her one room, all neat on afternoons,
As if some memory were sacred there
And everything within the four low walls
An honored relic.


⁠⁠⁠One long summer's day
An angel entered at the rose-hung gate,
With skirts pale blue, a brow to quench the pearl,
Hair soft and blonde as infants', plenteous
As hers who made the wavy lengths once speak
The grateful worship of a rescued soul.
The angel paused before the open door
To give good day. "Come in," said Agatha.
I followed close, and watched and listened there.
The angel was a lady, noble, young,
Taught in all seemliness that fits a court,
All lore that shapes the mind to delicate use,
Yet quiet, lowly, as a meek white dove
That with its presence teaches gentleness.
Men called her Countess Linda; little girls
In Freiburg town, orphans whom she caressed,
Said Mamma Linda: yet her years were few,
Her outward beauties all in budding time,
Her virtues the aroma of the plant
That dwells in all its being, root, stem, leaf,
And waits not ripeness.


⁠⁠⁠"Sit," said Agatha.
Her cousins were at work in neighboring homes
But yet she was not lonely; all things round
Seemed filled with noiseless yet responsive life,
As of a child at breast that gently clings:
Not sunlight only or the breathing flowers
Or the swift shadows of the birds and bees,
But all the household goods, which, polished fair
By hands that cherished them for service done,
Shone as with glad content. The wooden beams
Dark and yet friendly, easy to be reached.
Bore three white crosses for a speaking sign;
The walls had little pictures hung a-row,
Telling the stories of Saint Ursula,
And Saint Elizabeth, the lowly queen;
And on the bench that served for table too,
Skirting the wall to save the narrow space,
There lay the Catholic books, inherited
From those old times when printing still was young
With stout-limbed promise, like a sturdy boy.
And in the farthest corner stood the bed
Where o'er the pillow hung two pictures wreathed
With fresh-plucked ivy: one the Virgin's death,
And one her flowering tomb, while high above


The poems of George Eliot 1884 plate facing p311.png

'Fair Countess Linda sat upon the bench,
Close fronting the old knitter."


She smiling bends and lets her girdle down
For ladder to the soul that cannot trust
In life which outlasts burial. Agatha
Sat at her knitting, aged, upright, slim.
And spoke her welcome with mild dignity.
She kept the company of kings and queens
And mitred saints who sat below the feet
Of Francis with the ragged frock and wounds;
And Rank for her meant Duty, various,
Yet equal in its worth, done worthily.
Command was service; humblest service done
By willing and discerning souls was glory.
Fair Countess Linda sat upon the bench,
Close fronting the old knitter, and they talked
With sweet antiphony of young and old.


Agatha.

You like our valley, lady? I am glad
You thought it well to come again. But rest —
The walk is long from Master Michael's inn.


Countess Linda.

Yes, but no walk is prettier.


Agatha.

⁠⁠⁠It is true:
There lacks no blessing here, the waters all
Have virtues like the garments of the Lord,
And heal much sickness; then, the crops and cows
Flourish past speaking, and the garden flowers,
Pink, blue, and purple, 't is a joy to see
How they yield honey for the singing bees.
I would the whole world were as good a home.


Countess Linda.

And you are well off, Agatha?—your friends
Left you a certain bread: is it not so?


Agatha.

Not so at all, dear lady. I had naught,
Was a poor orphan; but I came to tend
Here in this house, an old afflicted pair,
Who wore out slowly; and the last who died,
Full thirty years ago, left me this roof
And all the household stuff. It was great wealth,
And so I had a home for Kate and Nell.


Countess Linda.

But how, then, have you earned your daily bread
These thirty years?


Agatha.

Oh, that is easy earning.
We help the neighbors, and our bit and sup
Is never failing: they have work for us
In house and field, all sorts of odds and ends,
Patching and mending, turning o'er the hay,
Holding sick children—there is always work;
And they are very good—the neighbors are:
Weigh not our bits of work with weight and scale,
But glad themselves with giving us good shares
Of meat and drink; and in the big farmhouse
When cloth comes home from weaving, the good wife
Cuts me a piece—this very gown—and says:
"Here, Agatha, you old maid, you have time
To pray for Hans who is gone soldiering:
The saints might help him, and they have much to do,
'T were well they were besought to think of him."
She spoke half jesting, but I pray, I pray
For poor young Hans. I take it much to heart
That other people are worse off than I—
I ease my soul with praying for them all.


Countess Linda.

That is your way of singing, Agatha;
Just as the nightingales pour forth sad songs,
And when they reach men's ears they make men's hearts
Feel the more kindly.


Agatha.

⁠⁠⁠Nay, I cannot sing:
My voice is hoarse, and oft I think my prayers
Are foolish, feeble things; for Christ is good
Whether I pray or not—the Virgin's heart
Is kinder far than mine; and then I stop
And feel I can do naught toward helping men,
Till out it comes, like tears that will not hold,
And I must pray again for all the world.
'T is good to me—I mean the neighbors are:
To Kate and Nell too. I have money saved
To go on pilgrimage the second time.


Countess Linda.

And do you mean to go on pilgrimage
With all your years to carry, Agatha?


Agatha.

The years are light, dear lady: 't is my sins
Are heavier than I would. And I shall go
All the way to Einsiedeln with that load:
I need to work it off.


Countess Linda.

What sort of sins,
Dear Agatha? I think they must be small.


Agatha.

Nay, but they may be greater than I know;
'T is but dim light I see by. So I try
All ways I know of to be cleansed and pure.
I would not sink where evil spirits are.
There's perfect goodness somewhere: so I strive.


Countess Linda.

You were the better for that pilgrimage
You made before? The shrine is beautiful;
And then you saw fresh country all the way.


Agatha.

Yes, that is true. And ever since that time
The world seems greater, and the Holy Church
More wonderful. The blessed pictures all,
The heavenly images with books and wings,
Are company to me through the day and night.
The time! the time! It never seemed far back,
Only to father's father and his kin
That lived before him. But the time stretched out
After that pilgrimage: I seemed to see
Far back, and yet I knew time lay behind,
As there are countries lying still behind
The highest mountains, there in Switzerland.
Oh, it is great to go on pilgrimage!


Countess Linda.

Perhaps some neighbors will be pilgrims too,
And you can start together in a band.


Agatha.

Not from these hills: people are busy here.
The beasts want tendance. One who is not missed
Can go and pray for others who must work.
I owe it to all neighbors, young and old;
For they are good past thinking—lads and girls
Given to mischief, merry naughtiness,
Quiet it, as the hedgehogs smooth their spines,
For fear of hurting poor old Agatha.
'T is pretty: why, the cherubs in the sky
Look young and merry, and the angels play
On citherns, lutes, and all sweet instruments.
I would have young things merry. See the Lord!
A little baby playing with the birds;
And how the Blessed Mother smiles at him.


Countess Linda.

I think you are too happy, Agatha,
To care for heaven. Earth contents you well.


Agatha.

Nay, nay, I shall be called, and I shall go
Right willingly. I shall get helpless, blind,
Be like an old stalk to be plucked away:
The garden must be cleared for young spring plants.
'T is home beyond the grave, the most are there,
All those we pray to, all the Church's lights—
And poor old souls are welcome in their rags:
One sees it by the pictures. Good Saint Ann,
The Virgin's mother, she is very old.
And had her troubles with her husband too.
Poor Kate and Nell are younger far than I,
But they will have this roof to cover them.
I shall go willingly; and willingness
Makes the yoke easy and the burden light.


Countess Linda.

When you go southward in your pilgrimage,
Come to see me in Freiburg, Agatha.
Where you have friends you should not go to inns.


Agatha.

Yes, I will gladly come to see you, lady,
And you will give me sweet hay for a bed.
And in the morning I shall wake betimes
And start when all the birds begin to sing.


Countess Linda.

You wear your smart clothes on the pilgrimage,
Such pretty clothes as all the women here
Keep by them for their best: a velvet cap
And collar golden-broidered? They look well
On old and young alike.


Agatha.

⁠⁠⁠Nay, I have none—
Never had better clothes than these you see.
Good clothes are pretty, but one sees them best
When others wear them, and I somehow thought
'T was not worth while. I had so many things
More than some neighbors, I was partly shy
Of wearing better clothes than they, and now
I am so old and custom is so strong
'T would hurt me sore to put on finery.


Countess Linda.

Your gray hair is a crown, dear Agatha.
Shake hands; good-by. The sun is going down,
And I must see the glory from the hill.


⁠I stayed among those hills; and oft heard more
Of Agatha. I liked to hear her name,
As that of one half grandame and half saint,
Uttered with reverent playfulness. The lads
And younger men all called her mother, aunt,
Or granny, with their pet diminutives,
And bade their lasses and their brides behave
Right well to one who surely made a link
'Twixt faulty folk and God by loving both:
Not one but counted service done by her,
Asking no pay save just her daily bread.
At feasts and weddings, when they passed in groups
Along the vale, and the good country wine,
Being vocal in them, made them quire along
In quaintly mingled mirth and piety,
They fain must jest and play some friendly trick
On three old maids; but when the moment came
Always they bated breath and made their sport
Gentle as feather-stroke, that Agatha
Might like the waking for the love it showed.
Their song made happy music 'mid the hills,
For nature tuned their race to harmony,
And poet Hans, the tailor, wrote them songs
That grew from out their life, as crocuses
From out the meadow's moistness. 'T was his song
They oft sang, wending homeward from a feast—
The song I give you. It brings in, you see.
Their gentle jesting with the three old maids.


Midnight by the chapel bell!
Homeward, homeward all, farewell!
I with you, and you with me,
Miles are short with company.
⁠Heart of Mary, bless the way,
⁠Keep us all by night and day!


Moon and stars at feast with night
Now have drunk their fill of light.
Home they hurry, making time
Trot apace, like merry rhyme.
⁠Heart of Mary, mystic rose,
⁠Send us all a sweet repose!


Swiftly through the wood down hill,
Run till you can hear the mill
Toni's ghost is wandering now,
Shaped just like a snow-white cow.
⁠Heart of Mary, morning star,
⁠Ward off danger, near or far!


Toni's wagon with its load
Fell and crushed him in the road
'Twixt these pine-trees. Never fear!
Give a neighbor's ghost good cheer.
⁠Holy Babe, our God and Brother,
⁠Bind us fast to one another!


Hark! the mill is at its work,
Now we pass beyond the murk
To the hollow, where the moon
Makes her silvery afternoon.
⁠Good Saint Joseph, faithful spouse.
⁠Help us all to keep our vows!


Here the three old maidens dwell,
Agatha and Kate and Nell;
See, the moon shines on the thatch.
We will go and shake the latch.
⁠Heart of Mary, cup of joy,
⁠Give us mirth without alloy!


Hush, 't is here, no noise, sing low,
Rap with gentle knuckles—so!
Like the little tapping birds,
On the door; then sing good words.
⁠Meek Saint Anna, old and fair,
⁠Hallow all the snow-white hair!


Little maidens old, sweet dreams!
Sleep one sleep till morning beams.
Mothers ye, who help us all,
Quick at hand, if ill befall.
⁠Holy Gabriel, lily-laden,
⁠Bless the aged mother-maiden!


Forward, mount the broad hillside
Swift as soldiers when they ride.
See the two towers how they peep,
Round-capped giants, o'er the steep.
⁠Heart of Mary, by thy sorrow,
⁠Keep us upright through the morrow!


Now they rise quite suddenly
Like a man from bended knee,
Now Saint Märgen is in sight.
Here the roads branch off—good-night.
⁠Heart of Mary, by thy grace,
⁠Give us with the saints a place!


ICANNOT choose but think upon the time
When our two lives grew like two buds that kiss
At lightest thrill from the bee's swinging chime,
Because the one so near the other is.


He was the elder and a little man
Of forty inches, bound to show no dread,
And I the girl that puppy-like now ran,
Now lagged behind my brother's larger tread.


I held him wise, and when he talked to me
Of snakes and birds, and which God loved the best,
I thought his knowledge marked the boundary
Where men grew blind, though angels knew the rest.


⁠If he said "Hush!" I tried to hold my breath;
⁠Wherever he said "Come!" I stepped in faith.


II.

Long years have left their writing on my brow,
But yet the freshness and the dew-fed beam
Of those young mornings are about me now,
When we two wandered toward the far-off stream


With rod and line. Our basket held a store
Baked for us only, and I thought with joy
That I should have my share, though he had more,
Because he was the elder and a boy.


The firmaments of daisies since to me
Have had those mornings in their opening eyes,
The bunched cowslip's pale transparency
Carries that sunshine of sweet memories,


⁠And wild-rose branches take their finest scent
⁠From those blest hours of infantine content.


III.

Our mother bade us keep the trodden ways,
Stroked down my tippet, set my brother's frill,
Then with the benediction of her gaze
Clung to us lessening, and pursued us still


Across the homestead to the rookery elms,
Whose tall old trunks had each a grassy mound,
So rich for us, we counted them as realms
With varied products: here were earth-nuts found,


And here the Lady-fingers in deep shade;
Here sloping toward the Moat the rushes grew,
The large to split for pith, the small to braid;
While over all the dark rooks cawing flew.


⁠And made a happy strange solemnity,
⁠A deep-toned chant from life unknown to me.


IV.

Our meadow-path had memorable spots:
One where it bridged a tiny rivulet,
Deep hid by tangled blue Forget-me-nots;
And all along the waving grasses met


The poems of George Eliot 1884 plate facing p392.png

"Across the homestead to the rookery elms.
Whose tall old trunks had each a grassy mound."


My little palm, or nodded to my cheek,
When flowers with upturned faces gazing drew
My wonder downward, seeming all to speak
With eyes of souls that dumbly heard and knew.


Then came the copse, where wild things rushed unseen,
And black-scathed grass betrayed the past abode
Of mystic gypsies, who still lurked between
Me and each hidden distance of the road.


⁠A gypsy once had startled me at play,
⁠Blotting with her dark smile my sunny day.


V.

Thus rambling we were schooled in deepest lore,
And learned the meanings that give words a soul,
The fear, the love, the primal passionate store,
Whose shaping impulses make manhood whole.


Those hours were seed to all my after good;
My infant gladness, through eye, ear, and touch,
Took easily as warmth a various food
To nourish the sweet skill of loving much.


For who in age shall roam the earth and find
Reasons for loving that will strike out love
With sudden rod from the hard year-pressed mind?
Were reasons sown as thick as stars above,


⁠'T is love must see them, as the eyes see light:
⁠Day is but Number to the darkened sight.


VI.

Our brown canal was endless to my thought;
And on its banks I sat in dreamy peace,
Unknowing how the good I loved was wrought,
Untroubled by the fear that it would cease.


Slowly the barges floated into view,
Hounding a grassy hill to me sublime
With some Unknown beyond it, whither flew
The parting cuckoo toward a fresh spring-time.


The wide-arched bridge, the scented elder-flowers,
The wondrous watery rings that died too soon,
The echoes of the quarry, the still hours
With white robe sweeping on the shadeless noon,


⁠Were but my growing self, are part of me,
⁠My present Past, my root of piety.


VII.

Those long days measured by my little feet
Had chronicles which yield me many a text;
Where irony still finds an image meet
Of full-grown judgments in this world perplext.


One day my brother left me in high charge,
To mind the rod, while he went seeking bait,
And bade me, when I saw a nearing barge,
Snatch out the line, lest he should come too late.


Proud of the task, I watched with all my might
For one whole minute, till my eyes grew wide,
Till sky and earth took on a strange new light
And seemed a dream-world floating on some tide


⁠A fair pavilioned boat for me alone
⁠Bearing me onward through the vast unknown.



VIII.

But sudden came the barge's pitch-black prow,
Nearer and angrier came my brother's cry,
And all my soul was quivering fear, when lo!
Upon the imperilled line, suspended high,


A silver perch! My guilt that won the prey,
Now turned to merit, had a guerdon rich
Of hugs and praises, and made merry play.
Until my triumph reached its highest pitch


When all at home were told the wondrous feat.
And how the little sister had fished well.
In secret, though my fortune tasted sweet,
I wondered why this happiness befell.


⁠"The little lass had luck," the gardener said:
⁠And so I learned, luck was with glory wed.


IX.

We had the selfsame world enlarged for each
By loving difference of girl and boy:
The fruit that hung on high beyond my reach
He plucked for me, and oft he must employ


A measuring glance to guide my tiny shoe
Where lay firm stepping-stones, or call to mind
"This thing I like my sister may not do,
For she is little, and I must be kind."


Thus boyish Will the nobler mastery learned
Where inward vision over impulse reigns,
Widening its life with separate life discerned,
A Like unlike, a Self that self restrains.


⁠His years with others must the sweeter be
⁠For those brief days he spent in loving me.


X.

His sorrow was my sorrow, and his joy
Sent little leaps and laughs through all my frame;
My doll seemed lifeless and no girlish toy
Had any reason when my brother came.


I knelt with him at marbles, marked his fling
Cut the ringed stem and make the apple drop,
Or watched him winding close the spiral string
That looped the orbits of the humming top.


Grasped by such fellowship my vagrant thought
Ceased with dream-fruit dream-wishes to fulfil;
My aëry-picturing fantasy was taught
Subjection to the harder, truer skill


⁠That seeks with deeds to grave a thought-tracked line.
⁠And by "What is," "What will be" to define.


XI.

School parted us; we never found again
That childish world where our two spirits mingled
Like scents from varying roses that remain
One sweetness, nor can evermore be singled.


Yet the twin habit of that early time
Lingered for long about the heart and tongue:
We had been natives of one happy clime,
And its dear accent to our utterance clung.


Till the dire years whose awful name is Change
Had grasped our souls still yearning in divorce,
And pitiless shaped them in two forms that range
Two elements which sever their life's course.


⁠But were another childhood-world my share,
⁠I would be born a little sister there.


1869


Six hundred years ago, in Dante's time,
Before his cheek was furrowed by deep rhyme;
When Europe, fed afresh from Eastern story,
Was like a garden tangled with the glory
Of flowers hand-planted and of flowers air-sown,
Climbing and trailing, budding and full-blown,
Where purple bells are tossed amid pink stars,
And springing blades, green troops in innocent wars,
Crowd every shady spot of teeming earth,
Making invisible motion visible birth,--

Six hundred years ago, Palermo town
Kept holiday. A deed of great renown,
A high revenge, had freed it from the yoke
Of hated Frenchmen; and from Calpe's rock
To where the Bosporus caught the earlier sun,
'Twas told that Pedro, King of Aragon,
Was welcomed master of all Sicily,--
A royal knight, supreme as kings should be
In strength and gentleness that make high chivalry.

Spain was the favorite home of knightly grace,
Where generous men rode steeds of generous race;
Both Spanish, yet half Arab; both inspired
By mutual spirit, that each motion fired
With beauteous response, like minstrelsy
Afresh fulfilling fresh expectancy.
So, when Palermo made high festival,
The joy of matrons and of maidens all
Was the mock terror of the tournament,
Where safety, with the glimpse of danger blent,
Took exaltation as from epic song,
Which greatly tells the pains that to great life belong.

And in all eyes King Pedro was the king
Of cavaliers; as in a full-gemmed ring
The largest ruby, or as that bright star
Whose shining shows us where the Hyads are.
His the best genet, and he sat it best;
His weapon, whether tilting or in rest,
Was worthiest watching; and his face, once seen,
Gave to the promise of his royal mien
Such rich fulfilment as the opened eyes
Of a loved sleeper, or the long-watched rise
Of vernal day, whose joy o'er stream and meadow flies.

But of the maiden forms that thick enwreathed
The broad piazza, and sweet witchery breathed,
With innocent faces budding all arow,
From balconies and windows high and low,
Who was it felt the deep mysterious glow,
The impregnation with supernal fire
Of young ideal love, transformed desire,
Whose passion is but worship of that Best
Taught by the many-mingled creed of each young breast?

'Twas gentle Lisa, of no noble line,
Child of Bernardo, a rich Florentine,
Who from his merchant-city hither came
To trade in drugs; yet kept an honest fame,
And had the virtue not to try and sell
Drugs that had none. He loved his riches well,
But loved them chiefly for his Lisa's sake,
Whom with a father's care he sought to make
The bride of some true honorable man,--
Of Perdicone (so the rumor ran),
Whose birth was higher than his fortunes were,
For still your trader likes a mixture fair
Of blood that hurries to some higher strain
Than reckoning money's loss and money's gain.
And of such mixture good may surely come:
Lord's scions so may learn to cast a sum,
A trader's grandson bear a well-set head,
And have less conscious manners, better bred;
Nor, when he tries to be polite, be rude instead.

'Twas Perdicone's friends made overtures
To good Bernardo; so one dame assures
Her neighbor dame, who notices the youth
Fixing his eyes on Lisa; and, in truth,
Eyes that could see her on this summer day
Might find it hard to turn another way.
She had a pensive beauty, yet not sad;
Rather like minor cadences that glad
The hearts of little birds amid spring boughs:
And oft the trumpet or the joust would rouse
Pulses that gave her cheek a finer glow,
Parting her lips that seemed a mimic bow
By chiselling Love for play in coral wrought,
Then quickened by him with the passionate thought,
The soul that trembled in the lustrous night
Of slow long eyes. Her body was so slight,
It seemed she could have floated in the sky,
And with the angelic choir made symphony;
But in her cheek's rich tinge, and in the dark
Of darkest hair and eyes, she bore a mark
Of kinship to her generous mother-earth,
The fervid land that gives the plumy palm-trees birth.

She saw not Perdicone; her young mind
Dreamed not that any man had ever pined
For such a little simple maid as she:
She had but dreamed how heavenly it would be
To love some hero noble, beauteous, great,
Who would live stories worthy to narrate,
Like Roland, or the warriors of Troy,
The Cid, or Amadis, or that fair boy
Who conquered every thing beneath the sun,
And somehow, some time, died at Babylon
Fighting the Moors. For heroes all were good
And fair as that archangel who withstood
The Evil One, the author of all wrong,--
That Evil One who made the French so strong;
And now the flower of heroes must he be
Who drove those tyrants from dear Sicily,
So that her maids might walk to vespers tranquilly.

Young Lisa saw this hero in the king;
And as wood-lilies that sweet odors bring
Might dream the light that opes their modest eyne
Was lily-odored; and as rites divine,
Round turf-laid altars, or 'neath roofs of stone,
Draw sanctity from out the heart alone
That loves and worships: so the miniature
Perplexed of her soul's world, all virgin pure,
Filled with heroic virtues that bright form,
Raona's royalty, the finished norm
Of horsemanship, the half of chivalry;
For how could generous men avengers be,
Save as God's messengers on coursers fleet?--
These, scouring earth, made Spain with Syria meet
In one self-world where the same right had sway,
And good must grow as grew the blessed day.
No more: great Love his essence had endued
With Pedro's form, and, entering, subdued
The soul of Lisa, fervid and intense,
Proud in its choice of proud obedience
To hardship glorified by perfect reverence.

Sweet Lisa homeward carried that dire guest,
And in her chamber, through the hours of rest,
The darkness was alight for her with sheen
Of arms, and plumed helm; and bright between
Their commoner gloss, like the pure living spring
'Twixt porphyry lips, or living bird's bright wing
'Twixt golden wires, the glances of the king
Flashed on her soul, and waked vibrations there
Of known delights love-mixed to new and rare:
The impalpable dream was turned to breathing flesh,
Chill thought of summer to the warm close mesh
Of sunbeams held between the citron-leaves,
Clothing her life of life. Oh! she believes
That she could be content if he but knew
(Her poor small self could claim no other due)
How Lisa's lowly love had highest reach
Of winged passion, whereto winged speech
Would be scorched remnants left by mounting flame.
Though, had she such lame message, were it blame
To tell what greatness dwelt in her, what rank
She held in loving? Modest maidens shrank
From telling love that fed on selfish hope;
But love, as hopeless as the shattering song,
Wailed for loved beings who have joined the throng
Of mighty dead ones. . . . Nay, but she was weak,
Knew only prayers and ballads, could not speak
With eloquence, save what dumb creatures have,
That with small cries and touches small boons crave.

She watched all day that she might see him pass
With knights and ladies; but she said, "Alas!
Though he should see me, it were all as one
He saw a pigeon sitting on the stone
Of wall or balcony: some colored spot
His eye just sees, his mind regardeth not.
I have no music-touch that could bring nigh
My love to his soul's hearing. I shall die,
And he will never know who Lisa was,--
The trader's child, whose soaring spirit rose
As hedge-born aloe-flowers that rarest years disclose.

"For were I now a fair deep-breasted queen
A-horseback, with blonde hair, and tunic green,
Gold-bordered, like Costanza, I should need
No change within to make me queenly there:
For they the royal-hearted women are
Who nobly love the noblest, yet have grace;
For needy suffering lives in lowliest place,
Carrying a choicer sunlight in their smile,
The heavenliest ray that pitieth the vile.
My love is such, it cannot choose but soar
Up to the highest; yet forevermore,
Though I were happy, throned beside the king,
I should be tender to each little thing
With hurt warm breast, that had no speech to tell
Its inward pang; and I would soothe it well
With tender touch, and with a low soft moan
For company: my dumb love-pang is lone,
Prisoned as topaz-beam within a rough-garbed stone."

So, inward-wailing, Lisa passed her days.
Each night the August moon with changing phase
Looked broader, harder, on her unchanged pain;
Each noon the heat lay heavier again
On her despair, until her body frail
Shrank like the snow that watchers in the vale
See narrowed on the height each summer morn;
While her dark glance burnt larger, more forlorn,
As if the soul within her, all on fire,
Made of her being one swift funeral-pyre.
Father and mother saw with sad dismay
The meaning of their riches melt away;
For without Lisa what would sequins buy?
What wish were left if Lisa were to die?
Through her they cared for summers still to come,
Else they would be as ghosts without a home
In any flesh that could feel glad desire.
They pay the best physicians, never tire
Of seeking what will soothe her, promising
That aught she longed for, though it were a thing
Hard to be come at as the Indian snow,
Or roses that on Alpine summits blow,
It should be hers. She answers with low voice,
She longs for death alone--death is her choice;
Death is the king who never did think scorn,
But rescues every meanest soul to sorrow born.

Yet one day, as they bent above her bed,
And watched her in brief sleep, her drooping head
Turned gently, as the thirsty flowers that feel
Some moist revival through their petals steal;
And little flutterings of her lids and lips
Told of such dreamy joy as sometimes dips
A skyey shadow in the mind's poor pool.
She oped her eyes, and turned their dark gems full
Upon her father, as in utterance dumb
Of some new prayer that in her sleep had come.
"What is it, Lisa?"--"Father, I would see
Minuccio, the great singer; bring him me."
For always, night and day, her unstilled thought,
Wandering all o'er its little world, had sought
How she could reach, by some soft pleading touch,
King Pedro's soul, that she who loved so much,
Dying, might have a place within his mind,--
A little grave which he would sometimes find
And plant some flower on it,--some thought, some memory kind.

Till in her dream she saw Minuccio
Touching his viola, and chanting low
A strain, that, falling on her brokenly,
Seemed blossoms lightly blown from off a tree;
Each burthened with a word that was a scent,--
Raona, Lisa, love, death, tournament;
Then in her dream she said, "He sings of me,
Might be my messenger; ah! now I see
The king is listening"--Then she awoke,
And, missing her dear dream, that new-born longing spoke.
She longed for music: that was natural;
Physicians said it was medicinal;
The humors might be schooled by true consent
Of a fine tenor and fine instrument;
In short, good music, mixed with doctor's stuff,
Apollo with Asklepios--enough!
Minuccio, entreated, gladly came.
(He was a singer of most gentle fame,
A noble, kindly spirit, not elate
That he was famous, but that song was great;
Would sing as finely to this suffering child
As at the court where princes on him smiled.)
Gently he entered and sat down by her,
Asking what sort of strain she would prefer,--
The voice alone, or voice with viol wed;
Then, when she chose the last, he preluded
With magic hand, that summoned from the strings
Aerial spirits, rare yet palpable wings
That fanned the pulses of his listener,
And waked each sleeping sense with blissful stir.
Her cheek already showed a slow, faint blush;
But soon the voice, in pure, full, liquid rush,
Made all the passion, that till now she felt,
Seem but as cooler waters that in warmer melt.

Finished the song, she prayed to be alone
With kind Minuccio; for her faith had grown
To trust him as if missioned like a priest
With some high grace, that, when his singing ceased,
Still made him wiser, more magnanimous,
Than common men who had no genius.
So, laying her small hand within his palm,
She told him how that secret, glorious harm
Of loftiest loving had befallen her;
That death, her only hope, most bitter were,
If, when she died, her love must perish too
As songs unsung, and thoughts unspoken do,
Which else might live within another breast.
She said, "Minuccio, the grave were rest,
If I were sure, that, lying cold and lone,
My love, my best of life, had safely flown
And nestled in the bosom of the king.
See, 'tis a small weak bird, with unfledged wing;
But you will carry it for me secretly,
And bear it to the king; then come to me
And tell me it is safe, and I shall go
Content, knowing that he I love my love doth know."

Then she wept silently; but each large tear
Made pleading music to the inward ear
Of good Minuccio. "Lisa, trust in me,"
He said, and kissed her fingers loyally:
"It is sweet law to me to do your will,
And, ere the sun his round shall thrice fulfil,
I hope to bring you news of such rare skill
As amulets have, that aches in trusting bosoms still."

He needed not to pause and first devise
How he should tell the king; for in nowise
Were such love-message worthily bested
Save in fine verse by music rendered.
He sought a poet-friend, a Siennese,
And "Mico, mine," he said, "full oft to please
Thy whim of sadness I have sung thee strains
To make thee weep in verse: now pay my pains,
And write me a canzon divinely sad,
Sinlessly passionate, and meekly mad
With young despair, speaking a maiden's heart
Of fifteen summers, who would fain depart
From ripening life's new-urgent mystery,--
Love-choice of one too high her love to be,--
But cannot yield her breath till she has poured
Her strength away in this hot-bleeding word,
Telling the secret of her soul to her soul's lord."

Said Mico, "Nay, that thought is poesy,
I need but listen as it sings to me.
Come thou again to-morrow." The third day,
When linked notes had perfected the lay,
Minuccio had his summons to the court,
To make, as he was wont, the moments short
Of ceremonious dinner to the king.
This was the time when he had meant to bring
Melodious message of young Lisa's love;
He waited till the air had ceased to move
To ringing silver, till Falernian wine
Made quickened sense with quietude combine;
And then with passionate descant made each ear incline.


Love, thou didst see me, light as morning's breath,
Roaming a garden in a joyous error,
Laughing at chases vain, a happy child,
Till of thy countenance the alluring terror
In majesty from out the blossoms smiled,
From out their life seeming a beauteous Death
O Love, who so didst choose me for thine own
Taking this little isle to thy great sway,
See now, it is the honor of thy throne
That what thou gavest perish not away,
Nor leave some sweet remembrance to atone
By life that will be for the brief life gone:
Hear, ere the shroud o'er these frail limbs be thrown--
Since every king is vassal unto thee,
My heart's lord needs must listen loyally--
O tell him I am waiting for my Death!

Tell him, for that he hath such royal power
'Twere hard for him to think how small a thing,
How slight a sign, would make a wealthy dower
For one like me, the bride of that pale king
Whose bed is mine at some swift-nearing hour.
Go to my lord, and to his memory bring
That happy birthday of my sorrowing,
When his large glance made meaner gazers glad,
Entering the bannered lists: 'twas then I had
The wound that laid me in the arms of Death.
Tell him, O Love, I am a lowly maid,
No more than any little knot of thyme
That he with careless foot may often tread;
Yet lowest fragrance oft will mount sublime
And cleave to things most high and hallowed,
As doth the fragrance of my life's springtime,
My lowly love, that, soaring, seeks to climb
Within his thought, and make a gentle bliss,
More blissful than if mine, in being his:
So shall I live in him, and rest in Death.

The strain was new. It seemed a pleading cry,
And yet a rounded, perfect melody,
Making grief beauteous as the tear-filled eyes
Of little child at little miseries.
Trembling at first, then swelling as it rose,
Like rising light that broad and broader grows,
It filled the hall, and so possessed the air,
That not one living, breathing soul was there,
Though dullest, slowest, but was quivering
In Music's grasp, and forced to hear her sing.
But most such sweet compulsion took the mood
Of Pedro (tired of doing what he would).
Whether the words which that strange meaning bore
Were but the poet's feigning, or aught more,
Was bounden question, since their aim must be
At some imagined or true royalty.
He called Minuccio, and bade him tell
What poet of the day had writ so well;
For, though they came behind all former rhymes,
The verses were not bad for these poor times.
"Monsignor, they are only three days old,"
Minuccio said; "but it must not be told
How this song grew, save to your royal ear."
Eager, the king withdrew where none was near,
And gave close audience to Minuccio,
Who meetly told that love-tale meet to know.
The king had features pliant to confess
The presence of a manly tenderness,--
Son, father, brother, lover, blent in one,
In fine harmonic exaltation;
The spirit of religious chivalry.
He listened, and Minuccio could see
The tender, generous admiration spread
O'er all his face, and glorify his head
With royalty that would have kept its rank,
Though his brocaded robes to tatters shrank.
He answered without pause, "So sweet a maid,
In Nature's own insignia arrayed,
Though she were come of unmixed trading blood
That sold and bartered ever since the flood,
Would have the self-contained and single worth
Of radiant jewels born in darksome earth.
Raona were a shame to Sicily,
Letting such love and tears unhonored be:
Hasten, Minuccio, tell her that the king
To-day will surely visit her when vespers ring."

Joyful, Minuccio bore the joyous word,
And told at full, while none but Lisa heard,
How each thing had befallen, sang the song,
And, like a patient nurse who would prolong
All means of soothing, dwelt upon each tone,
Each look, with which the mighty Aragon
Marked the high worth his royal heart assigned
To that dear place he held in Lisa's mind.
She listened till the draughts of pure content
Through all her limbs like some new being went--
Life, not recovered, but untried before,
From out the growing world's unmeasured store
Of fuller, better, more divinely mixed.
'Twas glad reverse: she had so firmly fixed
To die, already seemed to fall a veil
Shrouding the inner glow from light of senses pale.

Her parents, wondering, see her half arise;
Wondering, rejoicing, see her long dark eyes
Brimful with clearness, not of 'scaping tears,
But of some light ethereal that enspheres
Their orbs with calm, some vision newly learnt
Where strangest fires erewhile had blindly burnt.
She asked to have her soft white robe and band
And coral ornaments; and with her hand
She gave her long dark locks a backward fall,
Then looked intently in a mirror small,
And feared her face might, perhaps, displease the king:
"In truth," she said, "I am a tiny thing:
I was too bold to tell what could such visit bring."

Meanwhile the king, revolving in his thought
That innocent passion, was more deeply wrought
To chivalrous pity; and at vesper-bell,
With careless mien which hid his purpose well,
Went forth on horseback, and, as if by chance
Passing Bernardo's house, he paused to glance
At the fine garden of this wealthy man,
This Tuscan trader turned Palermitan;
But, presently dismounting, chose to walk
Amid the trellises, in gracious talk
With this same trader, deigning even to ask
If he had yet fulfilled the father's task
Of marrying that daughter, whose young charms
Himself, betwixt the passages of arms,
Noted admiringly. "Monsignor, no,
She is not married: that were little woe,
Since she has counted barely fifteen years;
But all such hopes of late have turned to fears;
She droops and fades, though, for a space quite brief,--
Scarce three hours past,--she finds some strange relief."
The king avised: "'Twere dole to all of us,
The world should lose a maid so beauteous:
Let me now see her; since I am her liege lord,
Her spirits must wage war with death at my strong word."
In such half-serious playfulness, he wends,
With Lisa's father and two chosen friends,
Up to the chamber where she pillowed sits,
Watching the door that opening admits
A presence as much better than her dreams,
As happiness than any longing seems.
The king advanced, and, with a reverent kiss
Upon her hand, said, "Lady, what is this?
You, whose sweet youth should others' solace be,
Pierce all our hearts, languishing piteously.
We pray you, for the love of us, be cheered,
Nor be too reckless of that life, endeared
To us who know your passing worthiness,
And count your blooming life as part of our life's bliss."

Those words, that touch upon her hand from him
Whom her soul worshipped, as far seraphim
Worship the distant glory, brought some shame
Quivering upon her cheek, yet thrilled her frame
With such deep joy she seemed in paradise,
In wondering gladness, and in dumb surprise,
That bliss could be so blissful. Then she spoke:
"Signor, I was too weak to bear the yoke,
The golden yoke, of thoughts too great for me;
That was the ground of my infirmity.
But now I pray your grace to have belief
That I shall soon be well, nor any more cause grief."

The king alone perceived the covert sense
Of all her words, which made one evidence,
With her pure voice and candid loveliness,
That he had lost much honor, honoring less
That message of her passionate distress.
He staid beside her for a little while,
With gentle looks and speech, until a smile
As placid as a ray of early morn
On opening flower-cups o'er her lips was borne
When he had left her, and the tidings spread
Through all the town, how he had visited
The Tuscan trader's daughter, who was sick,
Men said it was a royal deed, and catholic.

And Lisa? She no longer wished for death;
But as a poet, who sweet verses saith
Within his soul, and joys in music there,
Nor seeks another heaven, nor can bear
Disturbing pleasures, so was she content,
Breathing the life of grateful sentiment.
She thought no maid betrothed could be more blest;
For treasure must be valued by the test
Of highest excellence and rarity,
And her dear joy was best as best could be:
There seemed no other crown to her delight,
Now the high loved one saw her love aright.
Thus her soul thriving on that exquisite mood,
Spread like the May-time all its beauteous good
O'er the soft bloom of neck and arms and cheek,
And strengthened the sweet body, once so weak,
Until she rose and walked, and, like a bird
With sweetly rippling throat, she made her spring joys heard.

The king, when he the happy change had seen,
Trusted the ear of Constance, his fair queen,
With Lisa's innocent secret, and conferred
How they should jointly, by their deed and word,
Honor this maiden's love, which, like the prayer
Of loyal hermits, never thought to share
In what it gave. The queen had that chief grace
Of womanhood, a heart that can embrace
All goodness in another woman's form;
And that same day, ere the sun lay too warm
On southern terraces, a messenger
Informed Bernardo that the royal pair
Would straightway visit him, and celebrate
Their gladness at his daughter's happier state,
Which they were fain to see. Soon came the king
On horseback, with his barons, heralding
The advent of the queen in courtly state;
And all, descending at the garden gate,
Streamed with their feathers, velvet, and brocade,
Through the pleached alleys, till they, pausing, made
A lake of splendor 'mid the aloes gray;
When, meekly facing all their proud array,
The white-robed Lisa with her parents stood,
As some white dove before the gorgeous brood
Of dapple-breasted birds born by the Colchian flood.
The king and queen, by gracious looks and speech,
Encourage her, and thus their courtiers teach
How, this fair morning, they may courtliest be,
By making Lisa pass it happily.
And soon the ladies and the barons all
Draw her by turns, as at a festival
Made for her sake, to easy, gay discourse,
And compliment with looks and smiles enforce;
A joyous hum is heard the gardens round;
Soon there is Spanish dancing, and the sound
Of minstrel's song, and autumn fruits are pluckt;
Till mindfully the king and queen conduct
Lisa apart to where a trellised shade
Made pleasant resting. Then King Pedro said,--
"Excellent maiden, that rich gift of love
Your heart hath made us hath a worth above
All royal treasures, nor is fitly met
Save when the grateful memory of deep debt
Lies still behind the outward honors done:
And as a sign that no oblivion
Shall overflood that faithful memory,
We while we live your cavalier will be;
Nor will we ever arm ourselves for fight,
Whether for struggle dire, or brief delight
Of warlike feigning, but we first will take
The colors you ordain, and for your sake
Charge the more bravely where your emblem is:
Nor will we claim from you an added bliss
To our sweet thoughts of you save one sole kiss.
But there still rests the outward honor meet
To mark your worthiness; and we entreat
That you will turn your ear to proffered vows
Of one who loves you, and would be your spouse
We must not wrong yourself and Sicily
By letting all your blooming years pass by
Unmated: you will give the world its due
From beauteous maiden, and become a matron true."

Then Lisa, wrapt in virgin wonderment
At her ambitious love's complete content,
Which left no further good for her to seek
Than love's obedience, said, with accent meek,--
"Monsignor, I know well that were it known
To all the world how high my love had flown,
There would be few who would not deem me mad,
Or say my mind the falsest image had
Of my condition and your loftiness.
But Heaven has seen that for no moment's space
Have I forgotten you to be the king,
Or me myself to be a lowly thing--
A little lark, enamoured of the sky,
That soared to sing, to break its breast, and die.
But, as you better know than I, the heart
In choosing chooseth not its own desert,
But that great merit which attracteth it:
'Tis law, I struggled, but I must submit,
And having seen a worth all worth above,
I loved you, love you, and shall always love.
But that doth mean, my will is ever yours,
Not only when your will my good insures,
But if it wrought me what the world calls harm:
Fire, wounds, would wear from your dear will a charm.
That you will be my knight is full content,
And for that kiss,--I pray, first, for the queen's consent."
Her answer, given with such firm gentleness,
Pleased the queen well, and made her hold no less
Of Lisa's merit than the king had held.
And so, all cloudy threats of grief dispelled,
There was betrothal made that very morn
'Twixt Perdicone, youthful, brave, well-born,
And Lisa whom he loved; she loving well
The lot that from obedience befell.
The queen a rare betrothal ring on each
Bestowed, and other gems, with gracious speech.
And, that no joy might lack, the king, who knew
The youth was poor, gave him rich Ceffalu
And Cataletta,--large and fruitful lands,--
Adding much promise when he joined their hands.
At last he said to Lisa, with an air
Gallant yet noble, "Now we claim our share
From your sweet love, a share which is not small;
For in the sacrament one crumb is all."
Then, taking her small face his hands between,
He kissed her on the brow with kiss serene,--
Fit seal to that pure vision her young soul had seen.

And many witnessed that King Pedro kept
His royal promise. Perdicone stept
To many honors honorably won,
Living with Lisa in true union.
Throughout his life, the king still took delight
To call himself fair Lisa's faithful knight;
And never wore in field or tournament
A scarf or emblem, save by Lisa sent.
Such deeds made subjects loyal in that land;
They joyed that one so worthy to command,
So chivalrous and gentle, had become
The king of Sicily, and filled the room
Of Frenchmen, who abused the Church's trust,
Till, in a righteous vengeance on their lust,
Messina rose, with God, and with the dagger's thrust.


"I grant you ample leave
To use the hoary formula 'I am'
Naming the emptiness where thought is not;
But fill the void with definition, 'I'
Will be no more a datum than the words
You link false inference with, the 'Since' & 'so'
That, true or not, make up the atom-whirl.
Resolve your 'Ego', it is all one web
With vibrant ether clotted into worlds:
Your subject, self, or self-assertive 'I'
Turns nought but object, melts to molecules,
Is stripped from naked Being with the rest
Of those rag-garments named the Universe.
Or if, in strife to keep your 'Ego' strong
You make it weaver of the etherial light,
Space, motion, solids & the dream of Time--
Why, still 'tis Being looking from the dark,
The core, the centre of your consciousness,
That notes your bubble-world: sense, pleasure, pain,
What are they but a shifting otherness,
Phantasmal flux of moments?--"


The sky is cloudy, yellowed by the smoke.
For view there are the houses opposite
Cutting the sky with one long line of wall
Like solid fog: far as the eye can stretch
Monotony of surface & of form
Without a break to hang a guess upon.
No bird can make a shadow as it flies,
For all is shadow, as in ways o'erhung
By thickest canvass, where the golden rays
Are clothed in hemp. No figure lingering
Pauses to feed the hunger of the eye
Or rest a little on the lap of life.
All hurry on & look upon the ground,
Or glance unmarking at the passers by
The wheels are hurrying too, cabs, carriages
All closed, in multiplied identity.
The world seems one huge prison-house & court
Where men are punished at the slightest cost,
With lowest rate of colour, warmth & joy.


'Mid my gold-brown curls
There twined a silver hair:
I plucked it idly out
And scarcely knew 'twas there.

Coiled in my velvet sleeve it lay
And like a serpent hissed:
"Me thou canst pluck & fling away,
One hair is lightly missed;
But how on that near day
When all the wintry army muster in array?"



"OH MAY I JOIN THE CHOIR INVISIBLE."


Longum illud tempus, quum non ero, magis me movet, quam hoc
exiguum.—Cicero, ad Att., xii. 18.


OH may I join the choir invisible
 Of those immortal dead who live again
In minds made better by their presence: live
In pulses stirred to generosity,
In deeds of daring rectitude, in scorn
For miserable aims that end with self,
In thoughts sublime that pierce the night like stars,
And with their mild persistence urge man's search
To vaster issues.


⁠So to live is heaven:
To make undying music in the world,
Breathing as beauteous order that controls
With growing sway the growing life of man.
So we inherit that sweet purity
For which we struggled, failed, and agonized
With widening retrospect that bred despair.
Rebellious flesh that would not be subdued,
A vicious parent shaming still its child
Poor anxious penitence, is quick dissolved;
Its discords, quenched by meeting harmonies,
Die in the large and charitable air.
And all our rarer, better, truer self,
That sobbed religiously in yearning song,
That watched to ease the burden of the world,
Laboriously tracing what must be,
And what may yet be better—saw within
A worthier image for the sanctuary,
And shaped it forth before the multitude
Divinely human, raising worship so
To higher reverence more mixed with love—
That better self shall live till human Time
Shall fold its eyelids, and the human sky
Be gathered like a scroll within the tomb
Unread forever.


⁠⁠⁠This is life to come,
Which martyred men have made more glorious
For us who strive to follow. May I reach
That purest heaven, be to other souls
The cup of strength in some great agony,
Enkindle generous ardor, feed pure love,
Beget the smiles that have no cruelty—
Be the sweet presence of a good diffused,
And in diffusion ever more intense.
So shall I join the choir invisible
Whose music is the gladness of the world.


1867


Your soul was lifted by the wings to-day-
Hearing the master of the violin:
You praised him, praised the great Sebastian too
Who made that fine Chaconne; but did you think
Of old Antonio Stradivari?—him
Who a good century and half ago
Put his true work in that brown instrument,
And by the nice adjustment of its frame
Gave it responsive life, continuous
With the master's finger-tips and perfected
Like them by delicate rectitude of use.
Not Bach alone, helped by fine precedent
Of genius gone before, nor Joachim
Who holds the strain afresh incorporate.
By inward hearing and notation strict
Of nerve and muscle, made our joy to-day:
Another soul was living in the air,
And swaying it to true deliverance
Of high invention and responsive skill:—
That plain white-aproned man who stood at work
Patient and accurate full fourscore years,
Cherished his sight and touch by temperance,
And since keen sense is love of perfectness
Made perfect violins, the needed paths
For inspiration and high mastery.

No simpler man than he: he never cried,
"Why was I born to this monotonous task
Of making violins?" or flung them down
To suit with hurling act a well-hurled curse
At labor on such perishable stuff.
Hence neighbors in Cremona held him dull.
Called him a slave, a mill-horse, a machine.
Begged him to tell his motives, or to lend
A few gold-pieces to a loftier mind.
Yet he had pithy words full fed by fact;
For Fact, well-trusted, reasons and persuades,
Is gnomic, cutting, or ironical.
Draws tears, or is a tocsin to arouse—
Can hold all figures of the orator
In one plain sentence; has her pauses too—
Eloquent silence at the chasm abrupt
Where knowledge ceases. Thus Antonio
Made answers as Fact willed, and made them strong.

Naldo, a painter of eclectic school,
Taking his dicers, candlelight and grins
From Caravaggio, and in holier groups
Combining Flemish flesh with martyrdom—
Knowing all tricks of style at thirty-one,
And weary of them, while Antonio
At sixty-nine wrought placidly his best
Making the violin you heard to-day—
Naldo would tease him oft to tell his aims.

"Perhaps thou hast some pleasant vice to feed—
The love of louis d'ors in heaps of four,
Each violin a heap—I've nought to blame;
My vices waste such heaps. But then, why work
With painful nicety? Since fame once earned
By luck or merit—oftenest by luck—
(Else why do I put Bonifazio's name
To work that 'pinxit Naldo' would not sell?)
Is welcome index to the wealthy mob
Where they should pay their gold, and where they pay
There they find merit—take your tow for flax,
And hold the flax unlabelled with your name,
Too coarse for sufferance."


Antonio then:

"I like the gold—well, yes—but not for meals.
And as my stomach, so my eye and hand,
And inward sense that works along with both,
Have hunger that can never feed on coin.
Who draws a line and satisfies his soul,
Making it crooked where it should be straight?
An idiot with an oyster-shell may draw
His lines along the sand, all wavering,
Fixing no point or pathway to a point;
An idiot one remove may choose his line,
Straggle and be content; but God be praised,
Antonio Stradivari has an eye
That winces at false work, and loves the true,
With hand and arm that play upon the tool
As willingly as any singing bird
Sets him to sing his morning roundelay.
Because he likes to sing and likes the song."

Then Naldo: "'Tis a petty kind of fame
At best, that comes of making violins;
And saves no masses, either. Thou wilt go
To purgatory none the less."
But he:

"Twere purgatory here to make them ill;
And for my fame — when any master holds,
'Twixt chin and hand a violin of mine,
He will be glad that Stradivari lived,
Made violins, and made them of the best.
The masters only know whose work is good:
They will choose mine, and while God gives them skill
I give them instruments to play upon,
God choosing me to help Him."

"What! were God

At fault for violins, thou absent?"

"Yes;

He were at fault for Stradivari's work."

"Why, many hold Giuseppe's violins
As good as thine."

"May be: they are different.

His quality declines: he spoils his hand
With over-drinking. But were his the best,
He could not work for two. My work is mine,
And, heresy or not, if my hand slacked,
I should rob God—since He is fullest good—
Leaving a blank instead of violins.
I say, not God Himself can make man's best
Without best men to help Him. I am one best
Here in Cremona, using sunlight well
To fashion finest maple till it serves
More cunningly than throats, for harmony.
'Tis rare delight: I would not change my skill
To be the Emperor with bungling hands.
And lose my work, which comes as natural
As self at waking."

"Thou art little more

Than a deft potter's wheel, Antonio;
Taming out work by mere necessity
And lack of varied function. Higher arts
Subsist on freedom—eccentricity—
Uncounted inspirations—influence
That comes with drinking, gambling, talk turned wild,
Then moody misery and lack of food—
With every dithyrambic fine excess:
These make at last a storm which flashes out
In lighting revelations. Steady work
Turns genius to a loom; the soul must lie
Like grapes beneath the sun till ripeness comes
And mellow vintage. I could paint you now
The finest Crucifixion; yesternight
Returning home I saw it on a sky
Blue-black, thick-starred. I want-two louis d'ors
To buy the canvas and the costly blues—
Trust me a fortnight."

"Where are those last two

I lent thee for thy Judith?—her thou saw'st
In saffron gown, with Holofernes' head
And beauty all complete? "

"She is but sketched:

I lack the proper model—and the mood.
A great idea is an eagle's egg,
Craves time for hatching; while the eagle sits
Feed her."

"If thou wilt call thy pictures eggs

I call the hatching, work. 'Tis God gives skill,
But not without men's hands: He could not make
Antonio Stradivari's violins
Without Antonio. Get thee to thy easel."


"SWEET EVENINGS COME AND GO, LOVE."


⁠"La noche buena se viene,
La noche buena se va,
⁠Y nosotros nos iremos
⁠Y no volveremos mas."

—Old Villanico.


SWEET evenings come and go, love,
They came and went of yore:
This evening of our life, love,
⁠Shall go and come no more.


When we have passed away, love,
All things will keep their name;
But yet no life on earth, love,
⁠With ours will be same.


The daisies will be there, love,
⁠The stars in heaven will shine:
I shall not feel thy wish, love,
⁠Nor thou my hand in thine.


A better time will come, love.
⁠And better souls be born:
I would not be the best, love,
⁠To leave thee now forlorn.


THE DEATH OF MOSES.


MOSES, who spake with God as with his friend,
And ruled his people with the twofold power
Of wisdom that can dare and still be meek,
Was writing his last word, the sacred name
Unutterable of that Eternal Will
Which was and is and evermore shall be.
Yet was his task not finished, for the flock
Needed its shepherd and the life-taught sage
Leaves no successor ; but to chosen men.
The rescuers and guides of Israel,
A death was given called the Death of Grace,
Which freed them from the burden of the flesh
But left them rulers of the multitude
And loved companions of the lonely. This
Was God's last gift to Moses, this the hour
When soul must part from self and be but soul.


God spake to Gabriel, the messenger
Of mildest death that draws the parting life
Gently, as when a little rosy child
Lifts up its lips from off the bowl of milk
And so draws forth a curl that dipped its gold
In the soft white — thus Gabriel draws the soul.
"Go bring the soul of Moses unto me !"
And the awe-stricken angel answered, "Lord,
How shall I dare to take his life who lives
Sole of his kind, not to be likened once
In all the generations of the earth ? "


Then God called Michaël, him of pensive brow,
Snow-vest and flaming sword, who knows and acts:
"Go bring the spirit of Moses unto me!"
But Michaël with such grief as angels feel,
Loving the mortals whom they succor, pled:
"Almighty, spare me; it was I who taught
Thy servant Moses; he is part of me
As I of thy deep secrets, knowing them."


Then God called Zamaël, the terrible,
The angel of fierce death, of agony
That comes in battle and in pestilence
Remorseless, sudden or with lingering throes.
And Zamaël, his raiment and broad wings
Blood-tinctured, the dark lustre of his eyes
Shrouding the red, fell like the gathering night
Before the prophet. But that radiance
Won from the heavenly presence in the mount
Gleamed on the prophet's brow and dazzling pierced
Its conscious opposite: the angel turned
His murky gaze aloof and inly said:
"An angel this, deathless to angel's stroke."


But Moses felt the subtly nearing dark:
"Who art thou? and what wilt thou?" Zamaël then:
"I am God's reaper; through the fields of life
I gather ripened and unripened souls
Both willing and unwilling. And I come
Now to reap thee." But Moses cried.
Firm as a seer who waits the trusted sign:
"Reap thou the fruitless plant and common herb—
Not him who from the womb was sanctified
To teach the law of purity and love."
And Zamaël baffled from his errand fled.


But Moses, pausing, in the air serene
Heard now that mystic whisper, far yet near,
The all-penetrating Voice, that said to him,
"Moses, the hour is come and thou must die."
"Lord, I obey; but thou rememberest
How thou, Ineffable, didst take me once
Within thy orb of light untouched by death."
Then the voice answered, "Be no more afraid:
With me shall be thy death and burial."
So Moses waited, ready now to die.


And the Lord came, invisible as a thought.
Three angels gleaming on his secret track.
Prince Michaël, Zagaël, Gabriel, charged to guard
The soul-forsaken body as it fell
And bear it to the hidden sepulchre
Denied forever to the search of man.
And the Voice said to Moses: "Close thine eyes."
He closed them. "Lay thine hand upon thine heart.
And draw thy feet together." He obeyed.
And the Lord said, "O spirit! child of mine!
A hundred years and twenty thou hast dwelt
Within this tabernacle wrought of clay.
This is the end: come forth and flee to heaven."


But the grieved soul with plaintive pleading cried,
"I love this body with a clinging love:
The courage fails me. Lord, to part from it."


"O child, come forth! for thou shalt dwell with me
About the immortal throne where seraphs joy
In growing vision and in growing love."


Yet hesitating, fluttering, like the bird
With young wing weak and dubious, the soul
Stayed. But behold! upon the death-dewed lips
A kiss descended, pure, unspeakable—
The bodiless Love without embracing Love
That lingered in the body, drew it forth
With heavenly strength and carried it to heaven.


But now beneath the sky the watchers all,
Angels that keep the homes of Israel
Or on high purpose wander o'er the world
Leading the Gentiles, felt a dark eclipse:
The greatest ruler among men was gone.
And from the westward sea was heard a wail,
A dirge as from the isles of Javanim,
Crying, "Who now is left upon the earth
Like him to teach the right and smite the wrong ?"
And from the East, far o'er the Syrian waste,
Came slowlier, sadlier, the answering dirge:
"No prophet like him lives or shall arise
In Israel or the world forevermore."


But Israel waited, looking toward the mount.
Till with the deepening eve the elders came
Saying, "His burial is hid with God.
We stood far off and saw the angels lift
His corpse aloft until they seemed a star
That burnt itself away within the sky."


The people answered with mute orphaned gaze
Looking for what had vanished evermore.
Then through the gloom without them and within
The spirit's shaping light, mysterious speech,
Invisible Will wrought clear in sculptured sound,
The thought-begotten daughter of the voice,
Thrilled on their listening sense : "He has no tomb.
He dwells not with you dead, but lives as Law."


THE LEGEND OF JUBAL.


WHEN Cain was driven from Jehovah's land
He wandered eastward, seeking some far strand
Ruled by kind gods who asked no offerings
Save pure field-fruits, as aromatic things,
To feed the subtler sense of frames divine
That lived on fragrance for their food and wine:
Wild joyous gods, who winked at faults and folly,
And could be pitiful and melancholy.
He never had a doubt that such gods were;
He looked within, and saw them mirrored there.
Some think he came at last to Tartary,
And some to Ind; but, howsoe'er it be,
His staff he planted where sweet waters ran,
And in that home of Cain the Arts began.


Man's life was spacious in the early world:
It paused, like some slow ship with sail unfurled
Waiting in seas by scarce a wavelet curled;
Beheld the slow star-paces of the skies,
And grew from strength to strength through centuries;
Saw infant trees fill out their giant limbs,
And heard a thousand times the sweet bird's marriage hymns.


In Cain's young city none had heard of Death
Save him, the founder; and it was his faith
That here, away from harsh Jehovah's law,
Man was immortal, since no halt or flaw
In Cain's own frame betrayed six hundred years,
But dark as pines that autumn never sears
His locks thronged backward as he ran, his frame
Rose like the orbéd sun each morn the same,
Lake-mirrored to his gaze; and that red brand,
The scorching impress of Jehovah's hand,
Was still clear-edged to his unwearied eye,
Its secret firm in time-fraught memory.
He said, "My happy offspring shall not know
That the red life from out a man may flow
When smitten by his brother." True, his race
Bore each one stamped upon his new-born face
A copy of the brand no whit less clear;
But every mother held that little copy dear.


Thus generations in glad idlesse throve,
Nor hunted prey, nor with each other strove;
For clearest springs were plenteous in the land,
And gourds for cups; the ripe fruits sought the hand,
Bending the laden boughs with fragrant gold;
And for their roofs and garments wealth untold
Lay everywhere in grasses and broad leaves:
They labored gently, as a maid who weaves
Her hair in mimic mats, and pauses oft
And strokes across her palm the tresses soft,
Then peeps to watch the poised butterfly,
Or little burdened ants that homeward hie.
Time was but leisure to their lingering thought,
There was no need for haste to finish aught;
But sweet beginnings were repeated still
Like infant babblings that no task fulfil;
For love, that loved not change, constrained the simple will.


Till, hurling stones in mere athletic joy,
Strong Lamech struck and killed his fairest boy,
And tried to wake him with the tenderest cries,
And fetched and held before the glazed eyes
The things they best had loved to look upon;
But never glance or smile or sigh he won.
The generations stood around those twain
Helplessly gazing, till their father Cain
Parted the press, and said, "He will not wake;
This is the endless sleep, and we must make
A bed deep down for him beneath the sod;
For know, my sons, there is a mighty God
Angry with all man's race, but most with me.
I fled from out His land in vain!—'t is He
Who came and slew the lad, for He has found
This home of ours, and we shall all be bound
By the harsh bands of His most cruel will,
Which any moment may some dear one kill.
Nay, though we live for countless moons, at last
We and all ours shall die like summers past.
This is Jehovah's will, and He is strong;
I thought the way I travelled was too long
For Him to follow me: my thought was vain!
He walks unseen, but leaves a track of pain,
Pale Death His footprint is, and He will come again!"


And a new spirit from that hour came o'er
The race of Cain: soft idlesse was no more,
But even the sunshine had a heart of care,
Smiling with hidden dread—a mother fair
Who folding to her breast a dying child
Beams with feigned joy that but makes sadness mild.
Death was now lord of Life, and at his word
Time, vague as air before, new terrors stirred,
With measured wing now audibly arose
Throbbing through all things to some unknown close.
Now glad Content by clutching Haste was torn.
And Work grew eager, and Device was born.
It seemed the light was never loved before,
Now each man said, "'T will go and come no more.'
No budding branch, no pebble from the brook,
No form, no shadow, but new dearness took
From the one thought that life must have an end;
And the last parting now began to send
Diffusive dread through love and wedded bliss,
Thrilling them into finer tenderness.
Then Memory disclosed her face divine,
That like the calm nocturnal lights doth shine
Within the soul, and shows the sacred graves,
And shows the presence that no sunlight craves,
No space, no warmth, but moves among them all;
Gone and yet here, and coming at each call,
With ready voice and eyes that understand,
And lips that ask a kiss, and dear responsive hand.


Thus to Cain's race death was tear-watered seed
Of various life and action-shaping need.
But chief the sons of Lamech felt the stings
Of new ambition, and the force that springs
In passion beating on the shores of fate.
They said, "There comes a night when all too late
The mind shall long to prompt the achieving hand,
The eager thought behind closed portals stand,
And the last wishes to the mute lips press
Buried ere death in silent helplessness.
Then while the soul its way with sound can cleave,
And while the arm is strong to strike and heave,
Let soul and arm give shape that will abide
And rule above our graves, and power divide
With that great god of day, whose rays must bend
As we shall make the moving shadows tend.
Come, let us fashion acts that are to be,
When we shall lie in darkness silently,
As our young brother doth, whom yet we see
Fallen and slain, but reigning in our will
By that one image of him pale and still."


For Lamech's sons were heroes of their race:
Jabal, the eldest, bore upon his face
The look of that calm river-god, the Nile,
Mildly secure in power that needs not guile.
But Tubal-Cain was restless as the fire
That glows and spreads and leaps from high to higher
Where'er is aught to seize or to subdue;
Strong as a storm he lifted or o'erthrew,
His urgent limbs like rounded granite grew,
Such granite as the plunging torrent wears
And roaring rolls around through countless years.
But strength that still on movement must be fed,
Inspiring thought of change, devices bred,
And urged his mind through earth and air to rove
For force that he could conquer if he strove,
For lurking forms that might new tasks fulfil
And yield unwilling to his stronger will.
Such Tubal-Cain. But Jubal had a frame
Fashioned to finer senses, which became
A yearning for some hidden soul of things,
Some outward touch complete on inner springs
That vaguely moving bred a lonely pain,
A want that did but stronger grow with gain
Of all good else, as spirits might be sad
For lack of speech to tell us they are glad.


Now Jabal learned to tame the lowing kine,
And from their udders drew the snow-white wine
That stirs the innocent joy, and makes the stream
Of elemental life with fulness teem;
The star-browed calves he nursed with feeding hand,
And sheltered them, till all the little band
Stood mustered gazing at the sunset way
Whence he would come with store at close of day.
He soothed the silly sheep with friendly tone
And reared their staggering lambs that, older grown,
Followed his steps with sense-taught memory;
Till he, their shepherd, could their leader be
And guide them through the pastures as he would,
With sway that grew from ministry of good.
He spread his tents upon the grassy plain
Which, eastward widening like the open main,
Showed the first whiteness 'neath the morning star;
Near him his sister, deft, as women are,
Plied her quick skill in sequence to his thought
Till the hid treasures of the milk she caught
Revealed like pollen 'mid the petals white,
The golden pollen, virgin to the light.
Even the she-wolf with young, on rapine bent,
He caught and tethered in his mat-walled tent,
And cherished all her little sharp-nosed young
Till the small race with hope and terror clung
About his footsteps, till each new-reared brood,
Remoter from the memories of the wood,
More glad discerned their common home with man.
This was the work of Jabal: he began
The pastoral life, and, sire of joys to be.
Spread the sweet ties that bind the family
O'er dear dumb souls that thrilled at man's caress,
And shared his pains with patient helpfulness.


But Tubal-Cain had caught and yoked the fire.
Yoked it with stones that bent the flaming spire
And made it roar in prisoned servitude
Within the furnace, till with force subdued
It changed all forms he willed to work upon,
Till hard from soft, and soft from hard, he won.
The pliant clay he moulded as he would,
And laughed with joy when 'mid the heat it stood
Shaped as his hand had chosen, while the mass
That from his hold, dark, obstinate, would pass,
He drew all glowing from the busy heat,
All breathing as with life that he could beat
With thundering hammer, making it obey
His will creative, like the pale soft clay.
Each day he wrought and better than he planned,
Shape breeding shape beneath his restless hand.
(The soul without still helps the soul within,
And its deft magic ends what we begin.)
Nay, in his dreams his hammer he would wield
And seem to see a myriad types revealed.
Then spring with wondering triumphant cry.
And, lest the inspiring vision should go by,
Would rush to labor with that plastic zeal
Which all the passion of our life can steal
For force to work with. Each day saw the birth
Of various forms which, flung upon the earth,
Seemed harmless toys to cheat the exacting hour,
But were as seeds instinct with hidden power.
The axe, the club, the spikéd wheel, the chain,
Held silently the shrieks and moans of pain;
And near them latent lay in share and spade,
In the strong bar, the saw, and deep-curved blade,
Glad voices of the hearth and harvest-home,
The social good, and all earth's joy to come.
Thus to mixed ends wrought Tubal; and they say,
Some things he made have lasted to this day;
As, thirty silver pieces that were found
By Noah's children buried in the ground.
He made them from mere hunger of device,
Those small white disks; but they became the price
The traitor Judas sold his Master for;
And men still handling them in peace and war
Catch foul disease, that comes as appetite,
And lurks and clings as withering, damning blight.
But Tubal-Cain wot not of treachery,
Nor greedy lust, nor any ill to be,
Save the one ill of sinking into naught,
Banished from action and act-shaping thought.
He was the sire of swift-transforming skill,
Which arms for conquest man's ambitious will;
And round him gladly, as his hammer rung,
Gathered the elders and the growing young:
These handled vaguely and those plied the tools,
Till, happy chance begetting conscious rules,
The home of Cain with industry was rife,
And glimpses of a strong persistent life,
Panting through generations as one breath,
And filling with its soul the blank of death.


Jubal, too, watched the hammer, till his eyes,
No longer following its fall or rise,
Seemed glad with something that they could not see,
But only listened to—some melody,
Wherein dumb longings inward speech had found,
Won from the common store of struggling sound.
Then, as the metal shapes more various grew,
And, hurled upon each other, resonance drew,
Each gave new tones, the revelations dim
Of some external soul that spoke for him:
The hollow vessel's clang, the clash, the boom,
Like light that makes wide spiritual room
And skyey spaces in the spaceless thought,
To Jubal such enlargéd passion brought
That love, hope, rage, and all experience,
Were fused in vaster being, fetching thence
Concords and discords, cadences and cries
That seemed from some world-shrouded soul to rise,
Some rapture more intense, some mightier rage,
Some living sea that burst the bounds of man's brief age.


Then with such blissful trouble and glad care
For growth within unborn as mothers bear,
To the far woods he wandered, listening,
And heard the birds their little stories sing
In notes whose rise and fall seemed melted speech—
Melted with tears, smiles, glances—that can reach
More quickly through our frame's deep-winding night,
And without thought raise thought's best fruit, delight.
Pondering, he sought his home again and heard
The fluctuant changes of the spoken word:
The deep remonstrance and the argued want,
Insistent first in close monotonous chant,
Next leaping upward to defiant stand
Or downward beating like the resolute hand;
The mother's call, the children's answering cry,
The laugh's light cataract tumbling from on high;
The suasive repetitions Jabal taught,
That timid browsing cattle homeward brought;
The clear-winged fugue of echoes vanishing;
And through them all the hammer's rhythmic ring.
Jubal sat lonely, all around was dim,
Yet his face glowed with light revealed to him:
For as the delicate stream of odor wakes
The thought-wed sentience and some image makes
From out the mingled fragments of the past,
Finely compact in wholeness that will last,
So streamed as from the body of each sound
Subtler pulsations, swift as warmth, which found
All prisoned germs and all their powers unbound,
Till thought self-luminous flamed from memory,
And in creative vision wandered free.
Then Jubal, standing, rapturous arms upraised.
And on the dark with eager eyes he gazed,
As had some manifested god been there.
It was his thought he saw: the presence fair
Of unachieved achievement, the high task,
The struggling unborn spirit that doth ask
With irresistible cry for blood and breath,
Till feeding its great life we sink in death.


He said, "Were now those mighty tones and cries
That from the giant soul of earth arise,
Those groans of some great travail heard from far,
Some power at wrestle with the things that are,
Those sounds which vary with the varying form
Of clay and metal, and in sightless swarm
Fill the wide space with tremors: were these wed
To human voices with such passion fed
As does put glimmer in our common speech,
But might flame out in tones whose changing reach,
Surpassing meagre need, informs the sense
With fuller union, finer difference—
Were this great vision, now obscurely bright
As morning hills that melt in new-poured light,
Wrought into solid form and living sound,
Moving with ordered throb and sure rebound,
Then—Nay, I Jubal will that work begin!
The generations of our race shall win
New life, that grows from out the heart of this,
As spring from winter, or as lovers' bliss
From out the dull unknown of unwaked energies."


Thus he resolved, and in the soul-fed light
Of coming ages waited through the night,
Watching for that near dawn whose chiller ray

The poems of George Eliot 1884 plate facing p293.png

"Then Jubal poured his triumph in a song."


Showed but the unchanged world of yesterday;
Where all the order of his dream divine
Lay like Olympian forms within the mine;
Where fervor that could fill the earthly round
With throngéd joys of form-begotten sound
Must shrink intense within the patient power
That lonely labors through the niggard hour.
Such patience have the heroes who begin,
Sailing the first to lands which others win.
Jubal must dare as great beginners dare,
Strike form's first way in matter rude and bare,
And, yearning vaguely toward the plenteous quire
Of the world's harvest, make one poor small lyre.
He made it, and from out its measured frame
Drew the harmonic soul, whose answers came
With guidance sweet and lessons of delight
Teaching to ear and hand the blissful Right,
Where strictest law is gladness to the sense
And all desire bends toward obedience.


Then Jubal poured his triumph in a song—
The rapturous word that rapturous notes prolong
As radiance streams from smallest things that burn,
Or thought of loving into love doth turn.
And still his lyre gave companionship
In sense-taught concert as of lip with lip.
Alone amid the hills at first he tried
His wingéd song; then with adoring pride
And bridegroom's joy at leading forth his bride,
He said, "This wonder which my soul hath found,
This heart of music in the might of sound,
Shall forthwith be the share of all our race
And like the morning gladden common space:
The song shall spread and swell as rivers do,
And I will teach our youth with skill to woo
This living lyre, to know its secret will,
Its fine division of the good and ill.
So shall men call me sire of harmony.
And where great Song is, there my life shall be."


Thus glorying as a god beneficent,
Forth from his solitary joy he went
To bless mankind. It was at evening,
When shadows lengthen from each westward thing,
When imminence of change makes sense more fine
And light seems holier in its grand decline.
The fruit-trees wore their studded coronal,
Earth and her children were at festival,
Glowing as with one heart and one consent—
Thought, love, trees, rocks, in sweet warm radiance blent.


The tribe of Cain was resting on the ground,
The various ages wreathed in one broad round.
Here lay, while children peeped o'er his huge thighs,
The sinewy man embrowned by centuries;
Here the broad-bosomed mother of the strong
Looked, like Demeter, placid o'er the throng
Of young lithe forms whose rest was movement too—
Tricks, prattle, nods, and laughs that lightly flew,
And swayings as of flower-beds where Love blew.
For all had feasted well upon the flesh
Of juicy fruits, on nuts, and honey fresh,
And now their wine was health-bred merriment,
Which through the generations circling went,
Leaving none sad, for even father Cain
Smiled as a Titan might, despising pain.
Jabal sat climbed on by a playful ring
Of children, lambs, and whelps, whose gambolling,
With tiny hoofs, paws, hands, and dimpled feet,
Made barks, bleats, laughs, in pretty hubbub meet.
But Tubal's hammer rang from far away,
Tubal alone would keep no holiday,
His furnace must not slack for any feast,
For of all hardship work he counted least;
He scorned all rest but sleep, where every dream
Made his repose more potent action seem.


Yet with health's nectar some strange thirst was blent,
The fateful growth, the unnamed discontent,
The inward shaping toward some unborn power,
Some deeper-breathing act, the being's flower.
After all gestures, words, and speech of eyes,
The soul had more to tell, and broke in sighs.
Then from the east, with glory on his head
Such as low-slanting beams on corn-waves spread,
Came Jubal with his lyre: there 'mid the throng,
Where the blank space was, poured a solemn song,
Touching his lyre to full harmonic throb
And measured pulse, with cadences that sob,
Exult and cry, and search the inmost deep
Where the dark sources of new passion sleep.
Joy took the air, and took each breathing soul,
Embracing them in one entrancéd whole,
Yet thrilled each varying frame to various ends,
As Spring new-waking through the creature sends
Or rage or tenderness; more plenteous life
Here breeding dread, and there a fiercer strife.
He who had lived through twice three centuries,
Whose months monotonous, like trees on trees,
In hoary forests, stretched a backward maze,
Dreamed himself dimly through the travelled days
Till in clear light he paused, and felt the sun
That warmed him when he was a little one;
Felt that true heaven, the recovered past,
The dear small Known amid the Unknown vast,
And in that heaven wept. But younger limbs
Thrilled toward the future, that bright land which swims
In western glory, isles and streams and bays,
Where hidden pleasures float in golden haze.
And in all these the rhythmic influence,
Sweetly o'ercharging the delighted sense,
Flowed out in movements, little waves that spread
Enlarging, till in tidal union led
The youths and maidens both alike long-tressed,
By grace-inspiring melody possessed,
Rose in slow dance, with beauteous floating swerve
Of limbs and hair, and many a melting curve
Of ringéd feet swayed by each close-linked palm:
Then Jubal poured more rapture in his psalm.
The dance fired music, music fired the dance,
The glow diffusive lit each countenance,
Till all the gazing elders rose and stood
With glad yet awful shock of that mysterious good.
Even Tubal caught the sound, and wondering came,
Urging his sooty bulk like smoke-wrapt flame
Till he could see his brother with the lyre,
The work for which he lent his furnace-fire
And diligent hammer, witting naught of this—
This power in metal shape which made strange bliss,
Entering within him like a dream full-fraught
With new creations finished in a thought.


The sun had sunk, but music still was there,
And when this ceased, still triumph filled the air:
It seemed the stars were shining with delight
And that no night was ever like this night.
All clung with praise to Jubal: some besought
That he would teach them his new skill; some caught,
Swiftly as smiles are caught in looks that meet,
The tone's melodic change and rhythmic beat:
'T was easy following where invention trod—
All eyes can see when light flows out from God.


And thus did Jubal to his race reveal
Music their larger soul, where woe and weal
Filling the resonant chords, the song, the dance,
Moved with a wider-winged utterance.
Now many a lyre was fashioned, many a song
Raised echoes new, old echoes to prolong,
Till things of Jubal's making were so rife,
"Hearing myself," he said, "hems in my life,
And I will get me to some far-off land,
Where higher mountains under heaven stand
And touch the blue at rising of the stars,
Whose song they hear where no rough mingling mars
The great clear voices. Such lands there must be,
Where varying forms make varying symphony—
Where other thunders roll amid the hills,
Some mightier wind a mightier forest fills
With other strains through other-shapen boughs;
Where bees and birds and beasts that hunt or browse
Will teach me songs I know not. Listening there,
My life shall grow like trees both tall and fair
That rise and spread and bloom toward fuller fruit each year."


He took a raft, and travelled with the stream
Southward for many a league, till he might deem
He saw at last the pillars of the sky,
Beholding mountains whose white majesty
Rushed through him as new awe, and made new song
That swept with fuller wave the chords along,
Weighting his voice with deep religious chime,
The iteration of slow chant sublime.
It was the region long inhabited
By all the race of Seth; and Jubal said:
"Here have I found my thirsty soul's desire,
Eastward the hills touch heaven, and evening's fire
Flames through deep waters; I will take my rest,
And feed anew from my great mother's breast,
The sky-clasped Earth, whose voices nurture me
As the flowers' sweetness doth the honey-bee."
He lingered wandering for many an age,
And, sowing music, made high heritage
For generations far beyond the Flood—
For the poor late-begotten human brood
Born to life's weary brevity and perilous good.


And ever as he travelled he would climb
The farthest mountain, yet the heavenly chime,
The mighty tolling of the far-off spheres
Beating their pathway, never touched his ears.
But wheresoe'er he rose the heavens rose,
And the far-gazing mountain could disclose
Naught but a wider earth; until one height
Showed him the ocean stretched in liquid light,
And he could hear its multitudinous roar,
Its plunge and hiss upon the pebbled shore:
Then Jubal silent sat, and touched his lyre no more.


He thought, "The world is great, but I am weak,
And where the sky bends is no solid peak
To give me footing, but instead, this main —
Myriads of maddened horses thundering o'er the plain.


"New voices come to me where'er I roam,
My heart too widens with its widening home:
But song grows weaker, and the heart must break
For lack of voice, or fingers that can wake
The lyre's full answer; nay, its chords were all
Too few to meet the growing spirit's call.
The former songs seem little, yet no more
Can soul, hand, voice, with interchanging lore
Tell what the earth is saying unto me:
The secret is too great, I hear confusedly.


"No farther will I travel: once again
My brethren I will see, and that fair plain
Where I and Song were born. There fresh-voiced youth
Will pour my strains with all the early truth
Which now abides not in my voice and hands,
But only in the soul, the will that stands
Helpless to move. My tribe remembering
Will cry ''T is he!' and run to greet me, welcoming."


The way was weary. Many a date-palm grew,
And shook out clustered gold against the blue,
While Jubal, guided by the steadfast spheres,
Sought the dear home of those first eager years,
When, with fresh vision fed, the fuller will
Took living outward shape in pliant skill;
For still he hoped to find the former things,
And the warm gladness recognition brings.
His footsteps erred among the mazy woods
And long illusive sameness of the floods,
Winding and wandering. Through far regions, strange
With Gentile homes and faces, did he range,
And left his music in their memory,
And left at last, when naught besides would free
His homeward steps from clinging hands and cries,
The ancient lyre. And now in ignorant eyes
No sign remained of Jubal, Lamech's son,
That mortal frame wherein was first begun
The immortal life of song. His withered brow
Pressed over eyes that held no lightning now,
His locks streamed whiteness on the hurrying air,
The unresting soul had worn itself quite bare
Of beauteous token, as the outworn might
Of oaks slow dying, gaunt in summer's light.
His full deep voice toward thinnest treble ran:
He was the rune-writ story of a man.


And so at last he neared the well-known land,
Could see the hills in ancient order stand
With friendly faces whose familiar gaze
Looked through the sunshine of his childish days;
Knew the deep-shadowed folds of hanging woods,
And seemed to see the selfsame insect broods
Whirling and quivering o'er the flowers—to hear
The selfsame cuckoo making distance near.
Yea, the dear Earth, with mother's constancy,
Met and embraced him, and said, "Thou art he!
This was thy cradle, here my breast was thine,
Where feeding, thou didst all thy life entwine
With my sky-wedded life in heritage divine."


But wending ever through the watered plain,
Firm not to rest save in the home of Cain,
He saw dread Change, with dubious face and cold
That never kept a welcome for the old,
Like some strange heir upon the hearth, arise
Saying, "This home is mine." He thought his eyes
Mocked all deep memories, as things new made,
Usurping sense, make old things shrink and fade
And seem ashamed to meet the staring day.
His memory saw a small foot-trodden way,
His eyes a broad far-stretching paven road
Bordered with many a tomb and fair abode;
The little city that once nestled low
As buzzing groups about some central glow,
Spread like a murmuring crowd o'er plain and steep,
Or monster huge in heavy-breathing sleep.
His heart grew faint, and tremblingly he sank
Close by the wayside on a weed-grown bank,
Not far from where a new-raised temple stood,
Sky-roofed, and fragrant with wrought cedar wood.
The morning sun was high; his rays fell hot
On this hap-chosen, dusty, common spot,
On the dry-withered grass and withered man:
That wondrous frame where melody began
Lay as a tomb defaced that no eye cared to scan.


But while he sank far music reached his ear.
He listened until wonder silenced fear
And gladness wonder; for the broadening stream
Of sound advancing was his early dream,
Brought like fulfilment of forgotten prayer;
As if his soul, breathed out upon the air,
Had held the invisible seeds of harmony
Quick with the various strains of life to be.
He listened: the sweet mingled difference
With charm alternate took the meeting sense;
Then bursting like some shield-broad lily red,
Sudden and near the trumpet's notes outspread,
And soon his eyes could see the metal flower.
Shining upturned, out on the morning pour
Its incense audible; could see a train
From out the street slow-winding on the plain
With lyres and cymbals, flutes and psalteries,
While men, youths, maids, in concert sang to these
With various throat, or in succession poured,
Or in full volume mingled. But one word
Ruled each recurrent rise and answering fall,
As when the multitudes adoring call
On some great name divine, their common soul,
The common need, love, joy, that knits them in one whole.
The word was "Jubal!" … "Jubal" filled the air
And seemed to ride aloft, a spirit there,
Creator of the quire, the full-fraught strain
That grateful rolled itself to him again.
The aged man adust upon the bank—
Whom no eye saw—at first with rapture drank
The bliss of music, then, with swelling heart,
Felt, this was his own being's greater part,
The universal joy once born in him.
But when the train, with living face and limb
And vocal breath, came nearer and more near,
The longing grew that they should hold him dear;
Him, Lamech's son, whom all their fathers knew,
The breathing Jubal—him, to whom their love was due.
All was forgotten but the burning need
To claim his fuller self, to claim the deed
That lived away from him, and grew apart,
While he as from a tomb, with lonely heart,
Warmed by no meeting glance, no hand that pressed,
Lay chill amid the life his life had blessed.
What though his song should spread from man's small race
Out through the myriad worlds that people space.
And make the heavens one joy-diffusing quire?—
Still 'mid that vast would throb the keen desire
Of this poor aged flesh, this eventide,
This twilight soon in darkness to subside,
This little pulse of self that, having glowed
Through thrice three centuries, and divinely strowed
The light of music through the vague of sound,
Ached with its smallness still in good that had no bound.


For no eye saw him, while with loving pride
Each voice with each in praise of Jubal vied.

The poems of George Eliot 1884 plate facing p304.png

"He sought the screen
Of thorny thickets, and there fell unseen."


Must lie in conscious trance, dumb, helpless lie
While all that ardent kindred passed him by?
His flesh cried out to live with living men
And join that soul which to the inward ken
Of all the hymning train was present there.
Strong passion's daring sees not aught to dare:
The frost-locked starkness of his frame low-bent,
His voice's penury of tones long spent,
He felt not; all his being leaped in flame
To meet his kindred as they onward came
Slackening and wheeling toward the temple's face:
He rushed before them to the glittering space.
And, with a strength that was but strong desire,
Cried, "I am Jubal, I! … I made the lyre!"


The tones amid a lake of silence fell
Broken and strained, as if a feeble bell
Had tuneless pealed the triumph of a land
To listening crowds in expectation spanned.
Sudden came showers of laughter on that lake;
They spread along the train from front to wake
In one great storm of merriment, while he
Shrank doubting whether he could Jubal be,
And not a dream of Jubal, whose rich vein
Of passionate music came with that dream-pain
Wherein the sense slips off from each loved thing
And all appearance is mere vanishing.
But ere the laughter died from out the rear,
Anger in front saw profanation near;
Jubal was but a name in each man's faith
For glorious power untouched by that slow death
Which creeps with creeping time; this too, the spot,
And this the day, it must be crime to blot.
Even with scoffing at a madman's lie:
Jubal was not a name to wed with mockery.
Two rushed upon him: two, the most devout
In honor of great Jubal, thrust him out,
And beat him with their flutes. 'T was little need;
He strove not, cried not, but with tottering speed,
As if the scorn and howls were driving wind
That urged his body, serving so the mind
Which could but shrink and yearn, he sought the screen
Of thorny thickets, and there fell unseen.
The immortal name of Jubal filled the sky,
While Jubal lonely laid him down to die.
He said within his soul, "This is the end:
O'er all the earth to where the heavens bend
And hem men's travel, I have breathed my soul:
I lie here now the remnant of that whole,
The embers of a life, a lonely pain;
As far-off rivers to my thirst were vain,
So of my mighty years naught comes to me again.


"Is the day sinking? Softest coolness springs
From something round me: dewy shadowy wings
Enclose me all around—no, not above—
Is moonlight there? I see a face of love,
Fair as sweet music when my heart was strong:
Yea—art thou come again to me, great Song?"


The face bent over him like silver night
In long-remembered summers; that calm light
Of days which shine in firmaments of thought,
That past unchangeable, from change still wrought.
And gentlest tones were with the vision blent:
He knew not if that gaze the music sent,
Or music that calm gaze: to hear, to see,
Was but one undivided ecstasy:
The raptured senses melted into one,
And parting life a moment's freedom won
From in and outer, as a little child
Sits on a bank and sees blue heavens mild
Down in the water, and forgets its limbs,
And knoweth naught save the blue heaven that swims.


"Jubal," the face said, "I am thy loved Past,
The soul that makes thee one from first to last.
I am the angel of thy life and death,
Thy outbreathed being drawing its last breath.
Am I not thine alone, a dear dead bride
Who blest thy lot above all men's beside?
Thy bride whom thou wouldst never change, nor take
Any bride living, for that dead one's sake?
Was I not all thy yearning and delight,
Thy chosen search, thy senses' beauteous Right,
Which still had been the hunger of thy frame
In central heaven, hadst thou been still the same?
Wouldst thou have asked aught else from any god—
Whether with gleaming feet on earth he trod
Or thundered through the skies—aught else for share
Of mortal good, than in thy soul to bear
The growth of song, and feel the sweet unrest
Of the world's spring-tide in thy conscious breast?
No, thou hadst grasped thy lot with all its pain,
Nor loosed it any painless lot to gain
Where music's voice was silent; for thy fate
Was human music's self incorporate:
Thy senses' keenness and thy passionate strife
Were flesh of her flesh and her womb of life.
And greatly hast thou lived, for not alone
With hidden raptures were her secrets shown,
Buried within thee, as the purple light
Of gems may sleep in solitary night;
But thy expanding joy was still to give,
And with the generous air in song to live,
Feeding the wave of ever-widening bliss
Where fellowship means equal perfectness.
And on the mountains in thy wandering
Thy feet were beautiful as blossomed spring,
That turns the leafless wood to love's glad home,
For with thy coming Melody was come.
This was thy lot, to feel, create, bestow,
And that immeasurable life to know
From which the fleshly self falls shrivelled, dead,
A seed primeval that has forests bred.
It is the glory of the heritage
Thy life has left, that makes thy outcast age:
Thy limbs shall lie dark, tombless on this sod,
Because thou shinest in man's soul, a god,
Who found and gave new passion and new joy
That naught but Earth's destruction can destroy.
Thy gifts to give was thine of men alone:
'T was but in giving that thou couldst atone
For too much wealth amid their poverty."


The words seemed melting into symphony.
The wings upbore him, and the gazing song
Was floating him the heavenly space along,
Where mighty harmonies all gently fell
Through veiling vastness, like the far-off bell,
Till, ever onward through the choral blue,
He heard more faintly and more faintly knew,
Quitting mortality, a quenched sun-wave,
The All-creating Presence for his grave.




THE  LEGEND  OF  JUBAL. 


When  Cain  was  driven  from  Jehovah's  land 
He  wandered  eastward,  seeking  some  far  strand 
Ruled  by  kind  gods  who  asked  no  offerings 
Save  pure  field-fruits,  as  aromatic  things, 
To  feed  the  subtler  sense  of  frames  divine 
That  lived  on  fragrance  for  their  food  and  wine  : 
Wild  joyous  gods,  who  winked  at  faults  and  folly, 
And  could  be  pitiful  and  melancholy. 
He  never  had  a  doubt  that  such  gods  were ; 
He  looked  within,  and  saw  them  mirrored  there. 
Some  think  he  came  at  last  to  Tartary, 
And  some  to  Ind  ;  but,  howsoe'er  it  be, 
His  staff  he  planted  where  sweet  waters  ran, 
And  in  that  home  of  Cain  the  Arts  began." 

Man's  life  was  spacious  in  the  early  world : 
It  paused,  like  some  slow  ship  with  sail  unfurled, 
Waiting  in  seas  by  scarce  a  wavelet  curled; 
Beheld  the  slow  star-paces  of  the  skies. 
And  grew  from  strength  to  strength  through  centuries  ; 
Saw  infant  trees  fill  out  their  giant  limbs, 
And  heard  a  thousand  times  the   sweet  birds*  marriage 
hymns. 

In  Cain's  young  city  none  had  heard  of  Death 
Save  him,  the  founder ;  and  it  was  his  faith 
That  here,  away  from  harsh  Jehovah's  law, 
Man  was  immortal,  since  no  halt  or  flaw 
In  Cain's  own  frame  betrayed  six  hundred  years, 
But  dark  as  pines  that  autumn  never  sears 
His  locks  thronged  backward  as  he  ran,  his  frame 
Rose  like  the  orbed  sun  each  morn  the  same, 
Lake-mirrored  to  his  gaze  ;  and  that  red  brand, 


228 


THE  LEGEND  OF  JUBAL, 


The  scorching  impress  of  Jehovah's  hand, 
Was  still  clear-edged  to  his  unwearied  eye, 
Its  secret  firm  in  time-fraught  memory. 
He  said,  "  My  happy  offspring  shall  not  know 
That  the  red  life  from  out  a  man  may  flow 
When  smitten  by  his  brother."    True,  his  race 
Bore  each  one  stamped  upon  his  new-born  face, 
A  copy  of  the  brand  no  whit  less  clear ; 
But  every  mother  held  that  little  copy  dear. 

Thus  generations  in  glad  idlesse  throve, 

Nor  hunted  prey,  nor  with  each  other  strove  ; 

For  clearest  springs  were  plenteous  in  the  land. 

And  gourds  for  cups ;  the  ripe  fruits  sought  the  hand, 

Bending  the  laden  boughs  with  fragrant  gold  ; 

And  for  their  roofs  and  garments  wealth  untold 

Lay  everywhere  in  grasses  and  broad  leaves : 

They  labored  gently,  as  a  maid  who  weaves 

Her  hair  in  mimic  mats,  and  pauses  oft 

And  strokes  across  her  palm  the  tresses  soft, 

Then  peeps  to  watch  the  poised  butterfly, 

Or  little  burthened  ants  that  homeward  hie. 

Time  was  but  leisure  to  their  lingering  thought, 

There  was  no  need  for  haste  to  finish  aught ; 

But  sweet  beginnings  were  repeated  still 

Like  infant  babblings  that  no  task  fulfil ; 

For  love,  that  loved  not  change,  constrained  the  simple  will 

Till,  hurling  stones  in  mere  athletic  joy, 
Strong  Lamech  struck  and  killed  his  fairest  boy. 
And  tried  to  wake  him  with  the  tenderest  cries, 
And  fetched  and  held  before  the  glazed  eyes 
The  things  they  best  had  loved  to  look  upon  ; 
But  never  glance  or  smile  or  sigh  he  won. 
The  generations  stood  around  those  twain 
Helplessly  gazing,  till  their  father  Cain 
Parted  the  press,  and  said,  "  He  will  not  wake. 
This  is  the  endless  sleep,  and  we  must  make 
A  bed  deep  down  for  him  beneath  the  sod; 
For  know,  my  sons,  there  is  a  mighty  God 
Angry  with  all  man's  race,  but  most  with  me. 
I  fled  from  out  His  land  in  vain ! — 'tis  He 


THE  LEGEND  OF  JUBAL, 


229 


Who  came  and  slew  the  lad,  for  He  has  found 

This  home  of  ours,  and  we  shall  all  be  bound 

By  the  harsh  bands  of  His  most  cruel  will, 

Which  any  moment  may  some  dear  one  kill. 

Nay,  though  we  live  for  countless  moons,  at  last  • 

We  and  all  ours  shall  die  like  summers  past. 

This  is  Jehovah's  will,  and  He  is  strong; 

I  thought  the  way  I  travelled  was  too  long 

For  Him  to  follow  me:  my  thought  was  vain! 

He  walks  unseen,  but  leaves  a  track  of  pain. 

Pale  Death  His  footprint  is,  and  He  will  come  again!" 

And  a  new  spirit  from  that  hour  came  o'er 

The  race  of  Cain :  soft  idlesse  was  no  more, 

But  even  the  sunshine  had  a  heart  of  care, 

Smiling  with  hidden  dread — a  mother  fair 

Who  folding  to  her  breast  a  dying  child 

Beams  with  feigned  joy  that  but  makes  sadness  mild. 

Death  was  now  lord  of  Life,  and  at  his  word 

Time,  vague  as  air  before,  new  terrors  stirred, 

With  measured  wing  now  audibly  arose 

Throbbing  through  all  things  to  some  unknown  close. 

Now  glad  Content  by  clutching  Haste  was  torn. 

And  Work  grew  eager,  and  Devise  was  born. 

It  seemed  the  light  was  never  loved  before, 

Now  each  man  said,  "  Twill  go  and  come  no  more." 

No  budding  branch,  no  pebble  from  the  brook, 

No  form,  no  shadow,  but  new  dearness  took 

From  the  one  thought  that  life  must  have  an  end; 

And  the  last  parting  now  began  to  send 

Diffusive  dread  through  love  and  wedded  bliss. 

Thrilling  them  into  finer  tenderness. 

Then  Memory  disclosed  her  face  divine, 

That  Hke  the  calm  nocturnal  lights  doth  shine 

Within  the  soul,  and  shows  the  sacred  graves. 

And  shows  the  presence  that  no  sunlight  craves. 

No  space,  no  warmth,  but  moves  among  them  all; 

Gone  and  yet  here,  and  coming  at  each  call, 

With  ready  voice  and  eyes  that  understand. 

And  lips  that  ask  a  kiss,  and  dear  responsive  hand. 

Thus  to  Cain's  race  death  was  tear-watered  seed 


THE  LEGEND  OF  JUBAL. 


Of  various  life  and  action-shaping  need. 

But  chief  the  sons  of  Lamech  felt  the  stings 

Of  new  ambition,  and  the  force  that  springs 

In  passion  beating  on  the  shores  of  fate. 

They  said,  "There  comes  a  night  when  all  too  late 

The  mind  shall  long  to  prompt  the  achieving  hand 

The  eager  thought  behind  closed  portals  stand, 

And  the  last  wishes  to  the  mute  lips  press 

Buried  ere  death  in  silent  helplessness. 

Then  while  the  soul  its  way  with  sound  can  cleave, 

And  while  the  arm  is  strong  to  strike  and  heave, 

Let  soul  and  arm  give  shape  that  will  abide 

And  rule  above  our  graves,  and  power  divide 

With  that  great  god  of  day,  whose  rays  must  bend 

As  we  shall  make  the  moving  shadows  tend. 

Come,  let  us  fashion  acts  that  are  to  be, 

When  we  shall  lie  in  darkness  silently. 

As  our  young  brother  doth,  whom  yet  we  see 

Fallen  and  slain,  but  reigning  in  our  will 

By  that  one  image  of  him  pale  and  still." 

For  Lamech's  sons  were  heroes  of  their  race. 

Jubal,  the  eldest,  bore  upon  his  face 

The  look  of  that  calm  river-god,  the  Nile, 

Mildly  secure  in  power  that  needs  not  guile. 

But  Tubal-Cain  was  restless  as  the  fire 

That  glows  and  spreads  and  leaps  from  high  to  higher 

Where'er  is  aught  to  seize  or  to  subdue; 

Strong  as  a  storm  he  lifted  or  overthrew, 

His  urgent  limbs  like  rounded  granite  grew. 

Such  granite  as  the  plunging  torrent  wears 

And  roaring  rolls  around  through  countless  years. 

But  strength  that  still  on  movement  must  be  fed, 

Inspiring  thought  of  change,  devices  bred, 

And  urged  his  mind  through  earth  and  air  to  rove 

For  force  that  he  could  conquer  if  he  strove, 

For  lurking  forms  that  might  new  tasks  fulfil 

And  yield  unwilling  to  his  stronger  will. 

Such  Tubal-Cain.    But  Jubal  had  a  frame 

Fashioned  to  finer  senses,  which  became 

A  yearning  for  some-hidden  soul  of  things, 

Some  outward  touch  complete  on  inner  springs 

That  vaguely  moving  bred  a  lonely  pain, 


THE  LEGEND  OF  JUBAL. 


A  want  that  did  but  stronger  grow  with  gain 
Of  all  good  else,  as  spirits  might  be  sad 
For  lack  of  speech,  to  tell  us  they  are  glad. 

Now  Jubal  learned  to  tame  the  lowing  kine, 

And  from  their  udders  drew  the  snow-white  wine 

That  stirs  the  innocent  joy,  and  makes  the  stream 

Of  elemental  life  with  fulness  teem ; 

The  star-browed  calves  he  nursed  with  feeding  hand, 

And  sheltered  them,  till  all  the  little  band 

Stood  mustered  gazing  at  the  sunset  way 

Whence  he  would  come  with  store  at  close  of  day. 

He  soothed  the  silly  sheep  with  friendly  tone 

And  reared  their  staggering  lambs  that,  older  grown, 

Followed  his  steps  with  sense-taught  memory; 

Till  he,  their  shepherd,  could  their  leader  be 

And  guide  them  through  the  pastures  as  he  would, 

With  sway  that  grew  from  ministry  of  good. 

He  spread  his  tents  upon  the  grassy  plain 

Which,  eastward  widening  like  the  open  main, 

Showed  the  first  whiteness  'neath  the  morning  star ; 

Near  him  his  sister,  deft,  as  women  are. 

Plied  her  quick  skill  in  sequence  to  his  thought 

Till  the  hid  treasures  of  the  milk  she  caught  . 

Revealed  like  pollen  'mid  the  petals  white, 

The  golden  pollen,  virgin  to  the  Hght. 

Even  the  she-wolf  with  young,  on  rapine  bent, 

He  caught  and  tethered  in  his  mat- walled  tent, 

And  cherished  all  her  little  sharp-nosed  young 

Till  the  small  race  with  hope  and  terror  clung 

About  his  footsteps,  till  each  new-reared  brood, 

Remoter  from  the  memories  of  the  wood. 

More  glad  discerned  their  common  home  with  man. 

This  was  the  work  of  Jubal :  he  began 

The  pastoral  life,  and,  sire  of  joys  to  be. 

Spread  the  sweet  ties  that  bind  the  family 

O'er  dear  dumb  souls  that  thrilled  at  man's  caress, 

And  shared  his  pains  with  patient  helpfulness. 

.   But  Tubal-Cain  had  caught  and  yoked  the  fire. 
Yoked  it  with  stones  that  bent  the  flaming  spire 
And  made  it  roar  in  prisoned  servitude 


THE  LEGEND  OF  JUBAL, 


Within  the  furnace,  till  with  force  subdued 

It  changed  all  forms  he  willed  to  work  upon. 

Till  hard  from  soft,  and  soft  from  hard,  he  won. 

The  pliant  clay  he  moulded  as  he  would, 

And  laughed  with  joy  when  'mid  the  heat  it  stood 

Shaped  as  his  hand  had  chosen,  while  the  mass 

That  from  his  hold,  dark,  obstinate,  would  pass, 

He  drew  all  glowing  from  the  busy  heat, 

All  breathing  as  with  life  that  he  could  beat 

With  thundering  hammer,  making  it  obey 

His  will  creative,  like  the  pale  soft  clay. 

Each  day  he  wrought  and  better  than  he  planned, 

Shape  breeding  shape  beneath  his  restless  hand. 

(The  soul  without  still  helps  the  soul  within, 

And  its  deft  magic  ends  what  we  begin.) 

Nay,  in  his  dreams  his  hammer  he  would  wield 

And  seem  to  see  a  myriad  types  revealed. 

Then  spring  with  wondering  triumphant  cry. 

And,  lest  the  inspiring  vision  should  go  by 

Would  rush  to  labor  with  that  plastic  zeal 

Which  all  the  passion  of  our  life  can  steal 

For  force  to  work  with.    Each  day  saw  the  birth 

Of  various  forms  which,  flung  upon  the  earth. 

Seemed  harmless  toys  to  cheat  the  exacting  hour, 

But  were  as  seeds  instinct  with  hidden  power. 

The  axe,  the  club,  the  spiked  wheel,  the  chain, 

Held  silently  the  shrieks  and  moans  of  pain ; 

And  near  them  latent  lay  in  shear  and  spade, 

In  the  strong  bar,  the  saw,  and  deep-curved  blade. 

Glad  voices  of  the  hearth  and  harvest-home. 

The  social  good,  and  all  earth's  joy  to  come. 

Thus  to  mixed  ends  wrought  Tubal ;  and  they  say, 

Some  things  he  made  have  lasted  to  this  day; 

As,  thirty  silver  pieces  that  were  found 

By  Noah's  children  buried  in  the  ground. 

He  made  them  from  mere  hunger  of  device, 

Those  small  white  discs  ;  but  they  became  the  price 

The  traitor  Judas  sold  his  Master  for; 

And  men  still  handUng  them  in  peace  and  war. 

Catch  foul  disease,  that  comes  as  appetite, 

And  lurks  and  clings  as  withering,  damning  blight. 

But  Tubal-Cain  wot  not  of  treachery. 


THE  LEGEND  OF  JUBAL. 


Nor  greedy  lust,  nor  any  ill  to  be, 
Save  the  one  ill  of  sinking  into  naught, 
Banished  from  action  and  act-shaping  thought 
He  was  the  sire  of  swift-transforming  skill. 
Which  arms  for  conquest  man's  ambitious  will ; 
And  round  him  gladly,  as  his  hammer  rung, 
Gathered  the  elders  and  the  growing  young : 
These  handled  vaguely  and  those  plied  the  tools 
Till,  happy  chance  begetting  conscious  rules, 
The  home  of  Cain  with  industry  was  rife, 
And  glimpses  of  a  strong  persistent  life. 
Panting  through  generations  as  one  breath. 
And  fiUing  with  its  soul  the  blank  of  death. 

Jubal,  too,  watched  the  hammer,  till  his  eyes. 

No  longer  following  its  fall  or  rise, 

Seemed  glad  with  something  that  they  could  not  see, 

But  only  listened  to— some  melody, 

Wherein  dumb  longings  inward  speech  had  found, 

Wpn  from  the  common  store  of  struggling  sound. 

Then,  as  the  metal  shapes  more  various  grew. 

And,  hurled  upon  each  other,  resonance  drew. 

Each  gave  new  tones,  the  revelations  dim 

Of  some  external  soul  that  spoke  for  him : 

The  hollow  vessel's  clang,  the  clash,  the  boom. 

Like  light  that  makes  wide  spiritual  room 

And  skyey  spaces  in  the  spaceless  thought. 

To  Jubal  such  enlarged  passion  brought 

That  love,  hope,  rage,  and  all  experience. 

Were  fused  in  vaster  being,  fetching  thence 

Concords  and  discords,  cadences  and  cries 

That  seemed  from  some  world-shrouded  soul  to  rise. 

Some  rapture  more  intense,  some  mightier  rage. 

Some  living  sea  that  burst  the  bounds  of  man's  brief  age. 

Then  with  such  blissful  trouble  and  glad  care 

For  growth  within  unborn  as  mothers  bear. 

To  the  far  v/cods  he  wandered,  listening, 

And  heard  the  birds  their  little  stories  sing 

In  notes  whose  rise  and  fall  seemed  melted  speech — 

Melted  with  tears,  smiles,  glances — that  can  reach 

More  quickly  through  our  frame's  deep-winding  night, 


234 


THE  LEGEND  OF  JUBAL. 


And  without  thought  raise  thought's  best  fruit,  delight. 

Pondering,  he  sought  his  home  again  and  heard 

The  fluctuant  changes  of  the  spoken  word : 

The  deep  remonstrance  and  the  argued  want, 

Insistent  first  in  close  monotonous  chant. 

Next  leaping  upward  to  defiant  stand 

Or  downward  beating  like  the  resolute  hand; 

The  mother's  call,  the  children's  answering  cry, 

The  laugh's  light  cataract  tumbling  from  on  high; 

The  suasive  repetitions  Jubal  taught, 

That  timid  browsing  cattle  homeward  brought; 

The  clear-winged  fugue  of  echoes  vanishing; 

And  through  them  all  the  hammer's  rhythmic  ring. 

Jubal  sat  lonely,  all  around  was  dim, 

Yet  his  face  glowed  with  light  revealed  to  him : 

For  as  the  delicate  stream  of  odor  wakes 

The  thought-wed  sentience  and  some  image  makes 

From  out  the  mingled  fragments  of  the  past. 

Finely  compact  in  wholeness  that  will  last, 

So  streamed  as  from  the  body  of  each  sound 

Subtler  pulsations,  swift  as  warmth,  which  found 

All  prisoned  germs  and  all  their  powers  unbound. 

Till  thought  self-luminous  flamed  from  memory, 

And  in  creative  vision  wandered  free 

Then  Jubal,  standing,  rapturous  arms  upraised, 

And  on  the  dark  with  eager  eyes  he  gazed. 

As  had  some  manifested  god  been  there. 

It  was  his  thought  he  saw :  the  presence  fair 

Of  unachieved  achievement,  the  high  task,  i 

The  struggling  unborn  spirit  that  doth  ask 

With  irresistible  cry  for  blood  and  breath. 

Till  feeding  its  great  life  we  sink  in  death. 

He  said,  "Were  now  those  mighty  tones  and  cries 

Til  at  from  the  giant  soul  of  earth  arise, 

Those  groans  of  some  great  travail  heard  from  far, 

Some  power  at  wrestle  with  the  things  that  are. 

Those  sounds  which  vary  with  the  varying  form 

Of  clay  and  metal,  and  in  sightless  swarm 

Fill  the  wide  space  with  tremors :  were  these  wed 

To  human  voices  with  such  passion  fed 

As  does  but  glimmer  in  our  common  speech, 


THE  LEGEND  OF  JUBAL. 


But  might  flame  out  in  tones  whose  changing  reach, 

Surpassing  meagre  need,  informs  the  sense 

With  fuller  union,  finer  difference — 

"Were  this  great  vision,  now  obscurely  bright 

As  morning  hills  that  melt  in  new-poured  light, 

Wrought  into  solid' form  and  living  sound. 

Moving  with  ordered  throb  and  sure  rebound, 

Then  Nay,  I,  Jubal  will  that  work  begin ! 

The  generations  of  our  race  shall  win 

New  life,  that  grows  from  out  the  heart  of  this. 

As  sprin  g  from  winter,  or  as  lovers'  bliss 

From  out  the  dull  unknown  of  unwaked  energies.'* 

Thus  he  resolved,  and  in  the  soul-fed  light 
Of  coming  ages  waited  through  the  night, 
Watching  for  that  near  dawn  whose  chiller  ray 
Showed  but  the  unchanged  world  of  yesterday; 
Where  all  the  order  of  his  dream  divine 
Lay  like  Olympian  forms  within  the  mine ; 
Where  fervor  that  could  fill  the  earthly  round 
With  thronged  joys  of  form -begotten  sound 
Must  shrink  intense  within  the  patient  power 
That  lonely  labors  through  the  niggard  hour. 
Such  patience  have  the  heroes  who  begin, 
Sailing  the  first  to  lands  which  others  win. 
Jubal  must  dare  as  great  beginners  dare. 
Strike  form's  first  way  in  matter  rude  and  bare. 
And,  yearning  vaguely  toward  the  plenteous  choir 
Of  the  world's  harvest,  make  one  poor  small  lyre. 
He  made  it,  and  from  out  its  measured  frame 
Drew  the  harmonic  soul,  whose  answers  came 
With  guidance  sweet  and  lessons  of  delight 
Teaching  to  ear  and  hand  the  blissful  Right, 
Where  strictest  law  is  gladness  to  the  sense 
And  all  desire  bends  toward  obedience. 

Then  Jubal  poured  his  triumph  in  a  song — 
The  rapturous  word  that  rapturous  notes  prolong 
As  radiance  streams  from  smallest  things  that  burn 
Or  thought  of  loving  into  love  doth  turn. 
And  still  his  lyre  gave  companionship 
In  sense-taught  concert  as  of  lip  with  lip. 


236 


THE  LEGEND  OF  JUBAL, 


Alone  amid  the  hills  at  first  he  tried 

His  winged  song;  then  with  adoring  pride. 

And  bridegroom's  joy  at  leading  forth  his  bride, 

He  said,  "This  wonder  which  my  soul  hath  found, 

This  heart  of  music  in  the  might  of  sound, 

Shall  forthwith  be  the  share  of  all  our  race 

And  like  the  morning  gladden  common  space: 

The  song  shall  spread  and  swell  as  rivers  do. 

And  I  will  teach  our  youth  with  skill  to  woo 

This  living  lyre,  to  know  its  secret  will, 

Its  fine  division  of  the  good  and  ill. 

So  shall  men  call  me  sire  of  harmony. 

And  where  great  Song  is,  there  my  life  shall  be." 

Thus  glorying  as  a  god  beneficent. 

Forth  from  his  solitary  joy  he  went 

To  bless  mankind.    It  was  at  evening. 

When  shadows  lengthen  from  each  westward  thing, 

When  imminence  of  change  makes  sense  more  fine 

And  light  seems  holier  in  its  grand  decline. 

The  fruit-trees  wore  their  studded  coronal. 

Earth  and  her  children  were  at  festival, 

Glowing  as  with  one  heart  and  one  consent — 

Thought,  love,  trees,  rocks,  in  sweet  warm  radiance  blent. 

The  tribe  of  Cain  was  resting  on  the  ground. 

The  various  ages  wreathed  in  one  broad  round. 

Here  lay,  while  children  peeped  o'er  his  huge  thighs, 

The  sinewy  man  embrowned  by  centuries; 

Here  the  broad-bosomed  mother  of  the  strong 

Looked,  like  Demeter,  placid  o'er  the  throng 

Of  young  lithe  forms  whose  rest  was  movement  too — 

Tricks,  prattle,  nods,  and  laughs  that  lightly  flew, 

And  swayings  as  of  flower-beds  where  Love  blew. 

For  all  had  feasted  well  upon  the  flesh 

Of  juicy  fruits,  on  nuts,  and  honey  fresh, 

And  now  their  wine  was  health-bred  merriment, 

Which  through  the  generations  circling  went. 

Leaving  none  sad,  for  even  father  Cain 

Smiled  as  a  Titan  might,  despising  pain. 

Jubal  sat  climbed  on  by  a  playful  ring 

Of  children,  lambs  and  whelps,  whose  gamboling, 


THE  LEGEND  OF  JUBAL. 


237 


With  tiny  hoofs,  paws,  hands,  and  dimpled  feet, 

Made  barks,  bleats,  laughs,  in  pretty  hubbub  meet, 

But  Tubal's  hammer  rang  from  far  away, 

Tubal  alone  would  keep  no  holiday. 

His  furnace  must  not  slack  for  any  feast, 

For  of  all  hardship  work  he  counted  least; 

He  scorned  all  rest  but  sleep,  where  every  dream 

Made  his  repose  more  potent  action  seem. 

Yet  with  health's  nectar  some  strange  thirst  was  blent, 

The  fateful  groWth,  the  unnamed  discontent. 

The  inward  shaping  toward  soriie  unborn  power, 

Some  deeper-breathing  act,  the  being's  flower. 

After  all  gestures,  words,  and  speech  of  eyes, 

The  soul  had  more  to  tell,  and  broke  in  sighs. 

Then  from  the  east,  with  glory  on  his  head, 

Such  as  low-slanting  beams  on  corn-waves  spread. 

Came  Jubal  with  his  lyre :  there  'mid  the  strong, 

Where  the  black  space  was,  poured  a  solemn  song. 

Touching  his  lyre  to  full  harmonic  throb 

And  measured  pulse,  with  cadences  that  sob. 

Exult  and  cry,  and  search  the  inmost  deep 

Where  the  dark  sources  of  new  passion  sleep. 

Joy  took  the  air,  and  took  each  breathing  soul, 

Embracing  them  in  one  entranced  whole. 

Yet  thrilled  each  varying  frame  to  various  ends, 

As  Spring  new-waking  through  the  creature  sends 

Or  rage  or  tenderness  ;  more  plenteous  life 

Here  breeding  dread,  and  there  a  fiercer  strife. 

He  who  had  lived  through  twice  three  centuries,  ' 

Whose  months  monotonous,  like  trees  on  trees 

In  hoary  forests,  stretched  a  backward  maze, 

Dreamed  himself  dimly  through  the  travelled  days 

Till  in  clear  light  he  paused,  and  felt  the  sun 

That  warmed  him  when  he  was  a  little  one; 

Felt  that  true  heaven,  the  recovered  past, 

The  dear  small  Know  amid  the  Unknown  vast, 

And  in  that  heaven  wept.    But  younger  limbs 

Thrilled  toward  the  future,  that  bright  land  which  swims 

In  western  glory,  isles  and  streams  and  bays. 

Where  hidden  pleasures  float  in  golden  haze. 

And  in  all  these  the  rhythmic  influence, 


238 


THE  LEGEND  OF  JUBAL, 


Sweetly  o'ercharging  the  delighted  sense, 

Flowed  out  in  movements,  little  waves  that  spread 

Enlarging,  till  in  tidal  union  led 

The  youths  and  maidens  both  alike  long-tressed 

By  grace-inspiring  melody  possessed, 

Rose  in  slow  dance,  with  beauteous  floating  swerve 

Of  limbs  and  hair,  and  many  a  melting  curve 

Of  ringed  feet  swayed  by  each  close-linked  palm : 

Then  Jubal  poured  more  rapture  in  his  psalm, 

The  dance  fired  music,  music  fired  the  dance, 

The  glow  diffusive  lit  each  countenance. 

Till  all  the  gazing  elders  rose  and  stood 

With  glad  yet  awful  shock  of  that  mysterious  good. 

Even  Tubal  caught  the  sound,  and  wondering  came, 
Urging  his  sooty  bulk  like  smoke-wrapt  flame 
Till  he  could  see  his  brother  with  the  lyre. 
The  work  for  which  he  lent  his  furnace-fire 
And  diligent  hammer,  witting  naught  of  this — 
This  power  in  mental  shape  which  made  strange  bliss. 
Entering  within  him  like  a  dream  full-fraught 
With  new  creations  finished  in  a  thought. 

The  sun  had  sunk,  but  music  still  was  there, 

And  when  this  ceased,  still  triumph  filled  the  air: 

It  seemed  the  stars  were  shining  with  delight, 

And  that  no  night  was  ever  like  this  night. 

All  clung  with  praise  to  Jubal;  some  besought 

That  he  would  teach  them  his  new  skill ;  some  caught, 

Swiftly  as  smiles  are  caught  in  looks  that  meet. 

The  tone's  melodic  change  and  rhythmic  beat: 

'Twas  easy  following  where  invention  trod — 

All  eyes  can  see  when  light  flows  out  from  God. 

And  thus  did  Jubal  to  his  race  reveal 
Music  their  larger  soul,  where  woe  and  weal 
Filling  the  resonant  chords,  the  song,  the  dance, 
Moved  with  a  wider-winged  utterance. 
Now  many  a  lyre  was  fashioned,  many  a  song 
Raised  echoes  new,  old  echoes  to  prolong, 
Till  things  of  Jubal's  making  were  so  rife, 
"Hearing  myself,"  he  said,  "hems  in  my  life. 


THE  LEGEND  OF  JUBAL. 


239 


And  I  will  get  me  to  some  far-off  land, 

Where  higher  mountains  under  heaven  stand 

And  touch  the  blue  at  rising  of  the  stars, 

Whose  song  they  hear  where  no  rough  mingling  mars 

The  great  clear  voices.    Such  lands  there  must  be, 

Where  varying  forms  make  varying  symphony — 

Where  other  thunders  roll  amid  the  hills. 

Some  mightier  wind  a  mightier  forest  fills 

With  other  strains  through  other-shapen  boughs ; 

Where  bees  and  birds  and  beasts  that  hunt  or  browse 

Will  teach  me  songs  I  know  not.    Listening  there, 

My  life  shall  grow  like  trees  both  tall  and  fair 

That  rise  and  spread  and  bloom  toward  fuller  fruit  each  year. 

He  took  a  raft,  and  travelled  with  the  stream 

Southward  for  many  a  league,  till  he  might  deem 

He  saw  at  last  the  pillars  of  the  sky, 

Beholding  mountains  whose  white  majesty 

Rushed  through  him  as  new  awe,  and  made  new  song 

That  swept  with  fuller  wave  the  chords  along, 

Weighting  his  voice  with  deep,  religious  chime, 

The  iteration  of  slow  chant  sublime. 

It  was  the  region  long  inhabited 

By  all  the  race  of  Seth  ;  and  Jubal  said  : 

Here  have  I  found  my  thirsty  soul's  desire. 
Eastward  the  hills  touch  heaven,  and  evening's  fire 
Flames  through  deep  waters  ;  I  will  take  my  rest, 
And  feed  anew  from  my  great  mother's  breast,  •  y 
The  sky-clasped  Earth,  whose  voices  nurture  me 
As  the  flowers'  sweetness  doth  the  honey-bee." 
He  lingered  wandering  for  many  an  age. 
And,  sowing  music,  made  high  heritage 
For  generations  far  beyond  the  Flood — 
For  the  poor  late-begotten  human  brood 
Born  to  life's  weary  brevity  and  perilous  good. 

And  ever  as  he  travelled  he  would  climb 
The  farthest  mountain,  yet  the  heavenly  chime, 
The  mighty  toiling  of  the  far-off  spheres 
Beating  their  pathway,  never  touched  his  ears. 
But  wheresoe'er  he  rose  the  heavens  rose. 
And  the  far-gazing  mountain  could  disclose 


THE  LEGEND  OF  JUBAL. 


Naught  but  a  wider  earth ;  until  one  height 
Showed  him  the  ocean  stretched  in  Hquid  Ught, 
And  he  could  hear  its  multitudinous  roar, 
Its  plunge  and  hiss  upon  the  pebbled  shore: 
Then  Jubal  silent  sat,  and  touched  his  lyre  no  more. 

He  thought,  "The  world  is  great,  but  I  am  weak, 
And  where  the  sky  bends  is  no  solid  peak 
To  give  me  footing,  but  instead,  this  main — 
Myriads  of  maddened  horses  thundering  o'er  the  plain. 

"New  voices  come  to  me  where'er  I  roam. 
My  heart  too  widens  with  its  widening  home: 
But  song  grows  weaker,  and  the  heart  must  break 
For  lack  of  voice,  or  fingers  that  can  wake 
The  lyre's  full  answer;  nay,  its  chords  were  all 
Too  few  to  meet  the  growing  spirit's  call. 
The  former  songs  seem  little,  yet  no  more 
Can  soul,  hand,  voice,  with  interchanging  lore 
Tell  what  the  earth  is  saying  unto  me : 
The  secret  is  too  great,  I  hear  confusedly. 

"No  farther  will  I  travel:  once  again 

My  brethren  I  will  see,  and  that  fair  plain 

Where  I  and  song  were  born.    There  fresh-voiced  youth 

Will  pour  my  strains  with  all  the  early  truth 

Which  now  abides  not  in  my  voice  and  hands, 

But  only  in  the  soul,  the  will  that  stands 

Helpless  to  move.    My  tribe  remembering 

Will  cry  ''Tis  he!'  and  run  to  greet  me,  welcoming.'* 

The  way  was  weary.    Many  a  date-palm  grew, 

And  shook  out  clustered  gold  against  the  blue. 

While  Jubal,  guided  by  the  steadfast  spheres, 

Sought  the  dear  home  of  those  first  eager  years, 

When,  with  fresh  vision  fed,  the  fuller  will 

Took  living  outward  shape  in  pliant  skill ; 

For  still  he  hoped  to  find  the  former  things, 

And  the  warm  gladness  recognition  brings. 

His  footsteps  erred  among  the  mazy  woods 

And  long  illusive  sameness  of  the  floods, 

Winding  and  wandering.    Through  far  regions,  strange 


THE  LEGEND  OF  JUBAL. 


"With  Gentile  homes  and  faces,  did  he  range, 
And  left  his  music  in  their  memory, 
And  left  at  last,  when  naught  besides  would  free 
His  homeward  steps  from '  clinging  hands  and  cries, 
The  ancient  lyre.    And  now  in  ignorant  eyes 
No  sign  remained  of  Jubal,  Lamech's  son, 
That  mortal  frame  wherein  was  first  begun 
The  immortal  life  of  song.    His  withered  brow 
Pressed  over  eyes  that  held  no  lightning  now, 
His  locks  streamed  whiteness  on  the  hurrying  air, 
The  unresting  soul  had  worn  itself  quite  bare 
Of  beauteous  token,  as  the  outworn  might 
Of  oaks  slow  dying,  gaunt  in  summer's  light. 
His  full  deep  voice  toward  thinnest  treble  ran: 
He  was  the  rune-writ  story  of  a  man. 

And  so  at  last  he  neared  the  well-known  land. 
Could  see  the  hills  in  ancient  order  stand 
With  friendly  faces  whose  familiar  gaze 
Looked  through  the  sunshine  of  his  childish  days; 
Knew  the  deep-shadowed  folds  of  hanging  woods, 
And  seemed  to  see  the  self-same  insect  broods 
Whirling  and  quivering  o'er  the  flowers — to  hear 
The  self-same  cuckoo  making  distance  near. 
Yea,  the  dear  Earth,  with  mother's  constancy, 
Met  and  embraced  him,  and  said,  ''Thou  art  he! 
This  was  thy  cradle,  here  my  breast  was  thine, 
Where  feeding,  thou  didst  all  thy  life  entwine 
With  my  sky-wedded  life  in  heritage  divine." 

But  wending  ever  through  the  watered  plain, 

Firm  not  to  rest  save  in  the  home  of  Cain, 

He  saw  dread  Change,  with  dubious  face  and  cold, 

That  never  kept  a  welcome  for  the  old, 

Like  some  strange  heir  upon  the  hearth,  arise, 

Saying  "  This  home  is  mine."    He  thought  his  eyes 

Mocked  all  deep  memories,  as  things  new  made. 

Usurping  sense,  make  old  things  shrink  and  fade 

And  seem  ashamed  to  meet  the  staring  day. 

His  memory  saw  a  small  foot-trodden  way, 

His  eyes  a  broad  far-stretching  paven  road 

Bordered  with  many  a  tomb  and  fair  abode ; 


242 


THE  LEGEND  OF  JUBAL. 


The  little  city  that  once  nestled  low 

As  buzzing  groups  about  some  central  glow, 

Spread  like  a  murmuring  crowd  o'er  plain  and  steep, 

Or  monster  huge  in  heavy-breathing  sleep. 

His  heart  grew  faint,  and  tremblingly  he  sank 

Close  by  the  wayside  on  a  weed-grown  bank, 

Not  far  from  where  a  new-raised  temple  stood, 

Sky-roofed,  and  fragrant  with  wrought  cedar  wood. 

The  morning  sun  was  high  ;  his  rays  fell  hot 

On  this  hap-chosen,  dusty,  common  spot. 

On  the  dry-withered  grass  and  withered  man : 

That  wondrous  frame  where  melody  began 

Lay  as  a  tomb  defaced  that  no  eye  cared  to  scan. 

But  while  he  sank  far  music  reached  his  ear. 

He  listened  until  wonder  silenced  fear 

And  gladness  wonder;  for  the  broadening  stream 

Of  sound  advancing  was  his  early  dream. 

Brought  like  fulfilment  of  forgotten  prayer ; 

As  if  his  soul,  breathed  out  upon  the  air. 

Had  held  the  invisible  seeds  of  harmony 

Quick  with  the  various  strains  of  life  to  be. 

He  listened:  the  sweet  mingled  difference 

With  charm  alternate  took  the  meeting  sense ; 

Then  bursting  like  some  shield-broad  lily  red, 

Sudden  and  near  the  trumpet's  notes  out-spread, 

And  soon  his  eyes  could  see  the  metal  flower, 

Shining  upturned,  out  on  the  morning  pour 

Its  incense  audible  ;  could  see  a  train 

From  out  the  street  slow-winding  on  the  plain 

With  lyres  and  cymbals,  flutes  and  psalteries. 

While  men,  youths,  maids,  in  concert  sang  to  these 

With  various  throat,  or  in  succession  poured, 

Or  in  full  volume  mingled.    But  one  word 

Ruled  each  recurrent  rise  and  answering  fall, 

As  when  the  multitudes  adoring  call 

On  some  great  name  divine,  their  common  soul. 

The  common  need,  love,  joy,  that  knits  them  in  one  whole. 

The  word  was  "  Jubal  !'*..."  Jubal  "  filled  the  air 
And  seemed  to  ride  aloft,  a  spirit  there. 
Creator  of  the  choir,  the  full-fraught  strain 


THE  LEGEND  OF  JUBAL. 


243 


That  grateful  rolled  itself  to  him  again. 

The  aged  man  adust  upon  the  bank — 

Whom  no  eyes  saw — at  first  with  rapture  drank 

The  bliss  of  music,  then,  with  swelling  heart. 

Felt  this  was  his  own  being's  greater  part, 

The  universal  joy  once  born  in  him. 

But  when  the  train,  with  living  face  and  Hmb 

And  vocal  breath,  came  nearer  and  more  near. 

The  longing  grew  that  they  should  hold  him  dear ; 

Him,  Lamech's  son,  whom  all  their  fathers  knew, 

The  breathing  Jubal — him,  to  whom  their  love  was  due. 

All  was  forgotten  but  the  burning  need 
To  claim  his  fuller  self,  to  claim  the  deed 
That  lived  away  from  him,  and  grew  apart. 
While  he  as  from  a  tomb,  with  lonely  heart, 
•  Warmed  by  no  meeting  glance,  no  hand  that  pressed, 
Lay  chill  amid  the  life  his  life  had  blessed. 
What  though  his  song  should  spread  from  man's  small  race 
Out  through  the  myriad  worlds  that  people  space, 
And  make  the  heavens  one  joy-diffusing  choir  ? — 
Still  'mid  that  vast  would  throb  the  keen  desire 
Of  this  poor  aged  flesh,  this  eventide, 
This  twilight  soon  in  darkness  to  subside. 
This  little  pulse  of  self  that,  having  glowed 
Through  thrice  three  centuries,  and  divinely  strowed 
The  light  of  music  through  the  vague  of  sound. 
Ached  with  its  smallness  still  in  good  that  had  no  bound. 

For  no  eye  saw  him,  while  with  loving  pride 
Each  voice  with  each  in  praise  of  Jubal  vied. 
Must  he  in  conscious  trance,  dumb,  helpless  lie 
While  all  that  ardent  kindred  passed  him  by? 
His  flesh  cried  out  to  live  with  living  men 
And  join  that  soul  which  to  the  inward  ken 
Of  all  the  hymning  train  was  present  there. 
Strong  passion's  daring  sees  not  aught  to  dare : 
The  frost-locked  starkness  of  his  frame  low-bent, 
His  voice's  penury  of  tones  long  spent. 
He  felt  not;  all  his  being  leaped  in  flame 
To  meet  his  kindred  as  they  onward  came 
Slackening  and  wheeling  toward  the  temple's  face : 


244 


THE  LEGEND  OF  JUBAL. 


He  rushed  before  them  to  the  ghttering  space, 
And,  with  a  strength  that  was  but  strong  desire, 
Cried,    I  am  Jubal,  I !  ...  I  made  the  lyre!  " 
The  tones  amid  a  lake  of  silence  fell 
Broken  and  strained,  as  if  a  feeble  bell 
Had  tuneless  pealed  the  triumph  of  a  land 
To  listening  crowds  in  expectation  spanned. 
Sudden  came  showers  of  laughter  on  that  lake ; 
They  spread  along  the  train  from  front  to  wake 
In  one  great  storm  of  merriment,  while  he 
Shrank  doubting  whether  he  could  Jubal  be, 
And  not  a  dream  of  Jubal,  whose  rich  vein 
Of  passionate  music  came  with  that  dream-pain 
Wherein  the  sense  sHps  off  from  each  loved  thing, 
And  all  appearance  is  mere  vanishing. 
But  ere  the  laughter  died  from  out  the  rear. 
Anger  in  front  saw  profanation  near; 
Jubal  was  but  a  name  in  each  man's  faith 
For  glorious  power  untouched  by  that  slow  death 
Which  creeps  with  creeping  time ;  this,  too,  the  spot, 
And  this  the  day,  it  must  be  crime  to  blot, 
Even  with  scoffing  at  a  madman's  lie : 
Jubal  was  not  a  name  to  wed  with  mockery. 

Two  rushed  upon  him :  two,  the  most  devout 
In  honor  of  great  Jubal,  thrust  him  out. 
And  beat  him  with  their  flutes.    'Twas  little  need; 
He  strove  not,  cried  not,  but  with  tottering  speed, 
As  if  the  scorn  and  howls  were  driving  wind 
That  urged  his  body,  serving  so  the  mind 
Which  could  but  shrink  and  yearn,  he  sought  the  screen 
Of  thorny  thickets,  and  there  fell  unseen. 
The  immortal  name  of  Jubal  filled  the  sky. 
While  Jubal  lonely  laid  him  down  to  die. 
^  He  said  within  his  soul,  ^'This  is  the  end: 
O'er  all  the  earth  to  where  the  heavens  bend 
And  hem  men's  travel,  I  have  breathed  my  soul: 
I  lie  here  now  the  remnant  of  that  whole, 
The  embers  of  a  life,  a  lonely  pain; 
As  far-off  rivers  to  my  thirst  were  vain. 
So  of  my  mighty  years  naught  comes  to  me  again. 
Is  the  day  sinking  ?    Softest  coolness  springs 


THE  LEGEND  OF  JUBAL, 


From  something  round  me :  dewy  shadowy  wings 
Enclose  me  all  around — no,  not  above — 
Is  moonlight  there  ?    I  see  a  face  of  love, 
Fair  as  sweet  music  when  my  heart  was  strong : 
Yea — art  thou  come  again  to  me,  great  Song?" 

The  face  bent  over  him  like  silver  night 

In  long-remembered  summers;  that  calm  light 

Of  days  which  shine  in  firmaments  of  thought, 

That  past  unchangeable,  from  change  still  wrought 

And  gentlest  tones  were  with  the  vision  blent: 

He  knew  not  if  that  gaze  the  music  sent 

Or  music  that  calm  gaze :  to  hear,  to  see, 

Was  but  one  undivided  ecstasy : 

The  raptured  senses  melted  into  one. 

And  parting  life  a  moment's  freedom  won 

From  in  and  outer,  as  a  little  child 

Sits  on  a  bank  and  sees  blue  heavens  mild 

Down  in  the  water,  and  forgets  its  limbs. 

And  knoweth  naught  save  the  blue  heaven  that  swims. 

"  Jubal,"  the  face  said,  "  I  am  thy  loved  Past, 
The  soul  that  makes  thee  one  from  first  to  last. 
I  am  the  angel  of  thy  life  and  death. 
Thy  outbreathed  being  drawing  its  last  breath. 
Am  I  not  thine  alone,  a  dear  dead  bride 
Who  blest  thy  lot  above  all  men's  beside  ? 
Thy  bride  whom  thou  wouldst  never  change,  nor  take 
Any  bride  living,  for  that  dead  one's  sake  ? 
Was  I  not  all  thy  yearning  and  delight, 
Thy  chosen  search,  thy  senses'  beauteous  Right, 
Which  still  had  been  the  hunger  of  thy  frame 
In  central  heaven,  hadst  thou  been  still  the  same? 
Wouldst  thou  have  asked  aught  else  from  any  god- 
Whether  with  gleaming  feet  on  earth  he  trod 
Or  thundered  through  the  skies — aught  else  for  share 
Of  mortal  good  than  in  thy  soul  to  bear 
The  growth  of  song,  and  feel  the  sweet  unrest 
Of  the  world's  spring-tide  in  thy  conscious  breast? 
No,  thou  hadst  grasped  thy  lot  with  all  its  pain. 
Nor  loosed  it  any  painless  lot  to  gain 
Where  music's  voice  was  silent ;  for  thy  fate 


246 


THE  LEGEND  OI'  JUBAL, 


Was  human  music's  self  incorporate : 

Thy  senses'  keenness  and  thy  passionate  strife 

Were  flesh  of  her  flesh  and  her  womb  of  Hfe. 

And  greatly  hast  thou  lived,  for  not  alone 

With  hidden  raptures  were  her  secrets  shown, 

Buried  within  thee,  as  the  purple  light 

Of  gems  may  sleep  in  solitary  night; 

But  thy  expanding  joy  was  still  to  give, 

And  with  the  generous  air  in  song  to  live, 

Feeding  the  wave  of  ever-widening  bliss 

Where  fellowship  means  equal  perfectness. 

And  on  the  mountains  in  thy  wandering 

Thy  feet  were  beautiful  as  blossomed  spring, 

That  turns  the  leafless  wood  to  love's  glad  home, 

For  with  thy  coming  Melody  was  come. 

This  was  thy  lot,  to  feel,  create,  bestow. 

And  that  immeasurable  life  to  know 

From  which  the  fleshly  self  falls  shrivelled,  dead, 

A  seed  primeval  that  has  forests  bred. 

It  is  the  glory  of  the  heritage 

Thy  life  has  left,  that  makes  thy  outcast  age : 

Thy  limbs  shall  lie  dark;  tombless  on  this  sod, 

Because  thou  shinest  in  man's  soul,  a  god. 

Who  found  and  gave  new  passion  and  new  joy 

That  naught  but  Earth's  destruction  can  destroy. 

Thy  gifts  to  give  was  thine  of  men  alone: 

'Twas  but  in  giving  that  thou  couldst  atone 

For  too  much  wealth  amid  their  poverty." — 

The  words  seemed  melting  into  symphony, 
The  wings  upbore  him,  and  the  gazing  song 
Was  floating  him  the  heavenly  space  along. 
Where  mighty  harmonies  all  gently  fell 
Through  veiling  vastness,  like  the  far-off"  bell, 
Till,  ever  onward  through  the  choral  blue. 
He  heard  more  faintly  and  more  faintly  knew. 
Quitting  mortality,  a  quenched  sun-wave. 
The  All-creating  Presence  for  his  grave. 
1869. 


AGATHA. 


Come  with  me  to  the  mountain,  not  where  rocks 

Soar  harsh  above  the  troops  of  hurrying  pines, 

But  where  the  earth  spreads  soft  and  rounded  breasts 

To  feed  her  children  ;  where  the  generous  hills 

Lift  a  green  isle  betwixt  the  sky  and  plain 

To  keep  some  Old  World  things  aloof  from  change. 

Here  too  'tis  hill  and  hollow  :  new-born  streams 

With  sweet  enforcement,  joyously  compelled 

Like  laughing  children,  hurry  down  the  steeps, 

And  make  a  dimpled  chase  athwart  the  stones ; 

Pine  woods  are  black  upon  the  heights,  the  slopes 

Are  green  with  pasture,  and  the  bearded  corn 

Fringes  the  blue  above  the  sudden  ridge : 

A  little  world  whose  round  horizon  cuts 

This  isle  of  hills  with  heaven  for  a  sea, 

Save  in  clear  moments  when  southwestward  gleams 

France  by  the  Rhine,  melting  anon  to  haze. 

The  monks  of  old  chose  here  their  still  retreat 

And  called  it  by  the  Blessed  Virgin's  name, 

Sancta  Maria,  which  the  peasant's  tongue. 

Speaking  from  out  the  parent's  heart  that  turns 

All  loved  things  into  little  things,  has  made 

Sanct  Margen  Holy  little  Mary,  dear 

As  all  the  sweet  home  things  she  smiles  upon, 

The  children  and  the  cows,  the  apple-trees, 

The  cart,  the  plough,  all  named  with  that  caress 

Which  feigns  them  little,  easy  to  be  held. 

Familiar  to  the  eyes  and  hand  and  heart. 

What  though  a  Queen  ?    She  puts  her  crown  away 

And  with  her  little  Boy  wears  common  clothes, 

Caring  for  common  wants,  remembering 

That  day  when  good  Saint  Joseph  left  his  work 

To  marry  her  with  humble  trust  sublime. 

The  monks  are  gone,  their  shadows  fall  no  more 


248 


AGATHA. 


Tall-frocked  and  cowled  athwart  the  evening  fields 

At  milking-time  ;  their  silent  corridors 

Are  turned  to  homes  of  bare-armed,  aproned  men, 

Who  toil  for  wife  and  childfen.    But  the  bells, 

Pealing  on  high  from  two  quaint  convent  towers, 

Still  ring  the  Catholic  signals,  summoning 

To  grave  remembrance  of  the  larger  life 

That  bears  our  own,  like  perishable  fruit 

Upon  its  heaven-wide  branches.    At  their  sound 

The  shepherd  boy  far-off  upoi;i  the  hill, 

The  workers  with  the  saw  and  at  the  forge. 

The  triple  generation  round  the  hearth, — 

Grandames  and  mothers  and  the  flute-voiced  girls,- 

Fall  on  their  knees  and  send  forth  prayerful  cries 

To  the  kind  Mother  with  the  little  Boy, 

Who  pleads  for  helpless  men  against  the  storm, 

Lightning  and  plagues  and  all  terrific  shapes 

Of  power  supreme. 

Within  the  prettiest  hollow  of  these  hills, 

Just  as  you  enter  it,  upon  the  slope 

Stands  a  low  cottage  neighbored  cheerily 

By  running  water,  which,  at  farthest  end 

Of  the  same  hollow,  turns  a  heavy  mill. 

And  feeds  the  pasture  for  the  miller's  cows, 

Blanchi  and  Nageli,  Veilchen  and  the  rest, 

Matrons  with  faces  as  Griselda  mild, 

Coming  at  call.    And  on  the  farthest  height 

A  little  tower  looks  out  above  the  pines 

Where  mounting  you  will  find  a  sanctuary 

Open  and  still;  without,  the  silent  crowd 

Of  heaven-planted,  incense-mingling  flowers ; 

Within,  the  altar  where  the  mother  sits 

'Mid  votive  tablets  hung  from  far-off  years 

By  peasants  succored  in  the  peril  of  fire, 

Fever,  or  flood,  who  thought  that  Mary's  love, 

Willing  but  not  omnipotent,  had  stood 

Between  their  lives  and  that  dread  power  which  slew 

I  heir  neighbor  at  their  side.    The  chapel  bell 

Will  melt  to  gentlest  music  ere  it  reach 

That  cottage  on  the  slope,  v/hose  garden  gate 

Has  caught  the  rose-tree  boughs  and  stands  ajar; 

So  does  the  door,  to  let  the  sunbeams  in; 


AGATHA. 


For  in  the  slanting  sunbeams  angels  come 
And  visit  Agatha  who  dwells  within, — 
Old  Agatha,  whose  cousins  Kate  and  Nell 
Are  housed  by  her  in  Love  and  Duty's  name, 
They  being  feeble,  with  small  withered  wits, 
And  she  believing  that  the  higher  gift 
Was  given  to  be  shared.    So  Agatha 
Shares  her  one  room,  all  neat  on  afternoons, 
As  if  some  memory  were  sacred  there, 
And  everything  within  the  four  low  walls 
An  honored  relic. 

One  long  summer's  day 
An  angel  entered  at  the  rose-hung  gate. 
With  skirts  pale  blue,  a  brow  to  quench  the  pearl, 
Hair  soft  and  blonde  as  infants',  plenteous 
As  hers  who  made  the  wavy  lengths  once  speak 
The  grateful  worship  of  a  rescued  soul. 
The  angel  paused  before  the  open  door 
To  give  good'day.    "  Come  in,"  said  Agatha. 
I  followed  close,  and  watched  and  listened  there. 
The  angel  was  a  lady,  noble,  young. 
Taught  in  all  seemliness  that  fits  a  court, 
All  lore  that  shapes  the  mind  to  delicate  use, 
Yet  quiet,  lowly,  as  a  meek  white  dove 
That  with  its  presence  teaches  gentleness. 
Men  called  her  Countess  Linda  ;  little  girls 
In  Freiburg  town,  orphans  whom  she  caressed, 
Said  Mamma  Linda :  yet  her  years  were  few, 
Her  outward  beauties  all  in  budding  time. 
Her  virtues  the  aroma  of  the  plant 
That  dwells  in  all  its  being,  root,  stem,  leaf, 
And  waits  not  ripeness. 

"  Sit,"  said  Agatha. 
Her  cousins  were  at  work  in  neighboring  homes 
But  yet  she  was  not  lonely  ;  all  things  round 
Seemed  filled  with  noiseless  yet  responsive  life. 
As  of  a  child  at  breast  that  gently  clings  : 
Not  sunlight  only  or  the  breathing  floAvers 
Or  the  swift  shadows  of  the  birds  and  bees, 
But  all  the  household  goods,  which,  polished  fair 
By  hands  that  cherished  them  for  service  done, 
Shone  as  with  glad  content.    The  wooden  beams 


25© 


AGATHA. 


Dark  and  yet  friendly,  easy  to  be  reached, 

Bore  three  white  crosses  for  a  speaking  sign ; 

The  walls  had  little  pictures  hung  a-row, 

Telling  the  stories  of  Saint  Ursula, 

And  Saint  Elizabeth,  the  lowly  queen; 

And  on  the  bench  that  served  for  table  too, 

Skirting  the  wall  to  save  the  narrow  space, 

There  lay  the  Catholic  books,  inherited 

From  those  old  times  when  printing  still  was  young 

With  stout-Hmbed  promise,  like  a  sturdy  boy. 

And  in  the  farthest  corner  stood  the  bed 

Where  o'er  the  pillow  hung  two  pictures  wreathed 

With  freshed-plucked  ivy  :  one  the  Virgin's  death, 

And  one  her  flowering  tomb,  while  high  above 

She  smiling  bends  and  lets  her  girdle  down 

For  ladder  to  the  soul  that  cannot  trust 

In  life  which  outlasts  burial.  Agatha 

Sat  at  her  knitting,  aged,  upright,  slim. 

And  spoke  her  welcome  with  mild  dignity. 

She  kept  the  company  of  kings  and  queens 

And  mitred  saints  who  sat  below  the  feet 

Of  Francis  with  the  ragged  frock  and  wounds  : 

And  Rank  for  her  meant  Duty,  various. 

Yet  equal  in  its  worth,  done  worthily. 

Command  was  service  ;  humblest  service  done 

By  willing  and  discerning  souls  was  glory. 

Fair  Countess  Linda  sat  upon  the  bench. 
Close  fronting  the  old  knitter,  and  they  talked 
With  sweet  antiphony  of  young  and  old. 

Agatha. 

You  like  our  valley,  lady  ?    I  am  glad 

You  thought  it  well  to  come  again.    But  rest — ■ 

The  walk  is  long  from  Master  Michael's  inn. 

Countess  Linda. 
Yes,  but  no  walk  is  prettier. 

Agatha. 

It  is  true 

There  lacks  no  blessing  here,  the  waters  all 
Have  virtues  like  the  garments  of  the  Lord, 


AGATHA. 


And  heal  much  sickness  ;  then,  the  crops  and  cows 
Flourish  past  speaking,  and  the  garden  flowers, 
Pink,  blue,  and  purple,  'tis  a  joy  to  see 
How  they  yield  honey  for  the  singing  bees. 
I  would  the  whole  world  were  as  good  a  home. 

Countess  Linda. 
And  you  are  well  off,  Agatha  ? — your  friends 
Left  you  a  certain  bread :  is  it  not  so  ? 

Agatha. 

Not  so  at  all,  dear  lady. .  I  had  nought, 

Was  a  poor  orphan ;  but  I  came  to  tend 

Here  in  this  house,  an  old  afflicted  pair. 

Who  wore  out  slowly ;  and  the  last  who  died, 

Full  thirty  years  ago,  left  me  this  roof 

And  all  the  household  stuff.    It  was  great  wealth; 

And  so  I  had  a  home  for  Kate  and  Nell. 

Countess  Linda. 
But  how  then,  have  you  earned  your  daily  bread 
These  thirty  years  ? 

Agatha. 
O,  that  is  easy  earning. 
We  help  the  neighbors,  and  our  bit  and  sup 
Is  never  failing ;  they  have  work  for  us 
In  house  and  field,  all  sorts  of  odds  and  ends, 
Patching  and  mending,  turning  o'er  the  hay, 
Holding  sick  children, — there  is  always  work; 
And  they  are  very  good, — the  neighbors  are: 
Weigh  not  our  bits  of  work  with  weight  and  scale. 
But  glad  themselves  with  giving  us  good  shares 
Of  meat  and  drink ;  and  in  the  big  farm-house 
When  cloth  comes  home  from  weaving,  the  good  wife 
Cuts  me  a  piece, — this  very  gown, — and  says : 
"  Here,  Agatha,  you  old  maid,  you  have  time 
To  pray  for  Hans  who  is  gone  soldiering : 
The  saints  might  help  him,  and  they  have  much  to  do, 
'Twere  well  they  were  besought  to  think  of  him." 
She  spoke  half  jesting,  but  I  pray,  I  pray 


252 


AGATHA. 


For  poor  young  Hans.    I  take  it  much  to  heart 
That  other  people  are  worse  off  than  I, — 
I  ease  my  soul  with  praying  for  them  all. 

Countess  Linda. 
That  is  your  way  of  singing,  Agatha; 
Just  as  the  nightingales  pour  forth  sad  songs, 
And  when  they  reach  men's  ears  they  make  men's  hearts 
Feel  the  more  kindly. 

Agatha. 

Nay,  I  cannot  sing: 
My  voice  is  hoarse,  and  oft  I  think  my  prayers 
Are  foolish,  feeble  things;  for  Christ  is  good 
Whether  I  pray  or  not, — the  Virgin's  heart 
Is  kinder  far  than  mine;  and  then  I  stop 
And  feel  I  can  do  nought  towards  helping  men, 
Till  out  it  comes,  like  tears  that  will  not  hold, 
And  I  must  pray  again  for  all  the  world. 
'Tis  good  to  me, — I  mean  the  neighbors  are: 
To  Kate  and  Nell  too.    I  have  money  saved 
To  go  on  pilgrimage  the  second  time. 

Countess  Linda. 
And  do  you  mean  to  go  on  pilgrimage  - 
With  all  your  years  to  carry,  Agatha? 

Agatha. 

The  years  are  light,  dear  lady :  'tis  my  sins 
Are  heavier  than  I  would.    And  I  shall  go 
All  the  way  to  Einsiedeln  with  that  load : 
I  need  to  work  it  off. 

Countess  Linda. 

What  sort  of  sins, 
Dear  Agatha  ?  I  think  they  must  be  small. 

Agatha. 

Nay,  but  they  may  be  greater  than  I  know ; 

'Tis  but  dim  light  I  see  by.    So  I  try 

All  ways  I  know  of  to  be  cleansed  and  pure. 


AGATHA. 


I  would  not  sink  where  evil  spirits  are. 

There's  perfect  goodness  somewhere :  so  I  strive. 

Countess  Linda. 
You  were  the  better  for  that  pilgrimage 
You  made  before?    The  shrine  is  beautiful; 
And  then  you  saw  fresh  country  all  the  way. 

Agatha. 

Yes,  that  is  true.    And  ever  since  that  time 
The  world  seems  greater,  and  the  Holy  Church 
More  wonderful.    The  blessed  pictures  all, 
The  heavenly  images  with  books  and  wings. 
Are  company  to  me  through  the  day  and  night. 
The  time  !  the  time  !    It  never  seemed  far  back, 
Only  to  father's  father  and  his  kin 
That  lived  before  him.    But  the  time  stretched  out 
After  that  pilgrimage :  I  seemed  to  see 
Far  back,  and  yet  I  knew  time  lay  behind. 
As  there  are  countries  lying  still  behind 
The  highest  mountains,  there  in  Switzerland. 
O,  it  is  great  to  go  on  pilgrimage ! 

Countess  Linda. 
Perhaps  some  neighbors  will  be  pilgrims  too, 
And  you  can  start  together  in  a  band. 

Agatha. 

Not  from  these  hills :  people  are  busy  here, 

The  beasts  want  tendance.    One  who  is  not  missed 

Can  go  and  pray  for  others  who  must  work. 

1  owe  it  to  all  neighbors,  young  and  old; 

For  they  are  good  past  thinking, — lads  and  girls 

Given  to  mischief,  merry  naughtiness. 

Quiet  it,  as  the  hedgehogs  smooth  their  spines. 

For  fear  of  hurting  poor  old  Agatha. 

'Tis  pretty :  why,  the  cherubs  in  the  sky 

Look  young  and  merry,  and  the  angels  play 

On  citherns,  lutes,  and  all  sweet  instruments. 

I  would  have  young  things  merry.    See  the  Lord: 

A  little  baby  playing  with  the  birds ; 

And  how  the  Blessed  Mother  smiles  at  him. 


254 


AGATHA, 


Countess  Linda. 
I  think  you  are  too  happy,  Agatha, 
To  care  for  heaven.    Earth  contents  you  well. 

Agatha. 

Nay,  nay,  I  shall  be  called,  and  I  shall  go 

Right  willingly.    I  shall  get  helpless,  blind. 

Be  like  an  old  stalk  to  be  plucked  away : 

The  garden  must  be  cleared  for  young  spring  plants. 

'Tis  home  beyond  the  grave,  the  most  are  there. 

All  those  we  pray  to,  all  the  Church's  lights, — 

And  poor  old  souls  are  welcome  in  their  rags : 

One  sees  it  by  the  pictures.    Good  Saint  Ann, 

The  Virgin's  mother,  she  is  very  old, 

And  had  her  troubles  with  her  husband  too. 

Poor  Kate  and  Nell  are  younger  far  than  I, 

But  they  will  have  this  roof  to  cover  them. 

I  shall  go  willingly ;  and  willingness 

Makes  the  yoke  easy  and  the  burden  light. 

Countess  Linda. 
When  you  go  southward  in  your  pilgrimage, 
Come  to  see  me  in  Freiburg,  Agatha. 
Where  you  have  friends  you  should  not  go  to  inns. 

Agatha. 

Yes,  I  will  gladly  come  to  see  you,  lady. 
And  you  will  give  me  sweet  hay  for  a  bed, 
And  in  the  morning  I  shall  wake  betimes 
And  start  when  all  the  birds  begin  to  sing. 

Countess  Linda. 
You  wear  your  smart  clothes  on  the  pilgrimage, 
Such  pretty  clothes  as  all  the  women  here 
Keep  by  them  for  their  best :  a  velvet  cap 
And  collar  golden-broidered  ?    They  look  well 
On  old  and  young  ahke. 

Agatha. 

Nay,  I  have  none, — 
Never  had  better  clothes  than  these  you  see. 
Good  clothes  are  pretty,  but  one  sees  them  best 


AGATHA. 


When  others  wear  them,  and  I  somehow  thought 
'Twas  not  worth  while.    I  had  so  many  things, 
More  than  some  neighbors,  I  was  partly  shy 
Of  wearing  better  clothes  than  they,  and  now 
I  am  so  old  and  custom  is  so  strong, 
Twould  hurt  me  sore  to  put  on  finery. 

Countess  Linda. 

Your  gray  hair  is  a  crown,  dear  Agatha. 

Shake  hands;  good-bye.    The  sun  is  going  down. 

And  I  must  see  the  glory  from  the  hill. 

I  stayed  among  those  hills ;  and  oft  heard  more 

Of  Agatha.    I  liked  to  hear  her  name. 

As  that  of  one  half  grandame  and  half  saint, 

Uttered  with  reverent  playfulness.    The  lads 

And  younger  men  all  called  her  mother,  aunt, 

Or  granny,  with  their  pet  diminutives, 

And  bade  their  lasses  and  their  brides  behave 

Right  well  to  one  who  surely  made  a  link 

'Twixt  faulty  folk  and  God  by  loving  both : 

Not  one  but  counted  service  done  by  her. 

Asking  no  pay  save  just  her  daily  bread. 

At  feasts  and  weddings,  when  they  passed  in  groups 

Along  the  vale,  and  the  good  country  wine, 

Being  vocal  in  them,  made  them  choir  along 

In  quaintly  mingled  mirth  and  piety. 

They  fain  inust  jest  and  play  some  friendly  trick 

On  three  old  maids;  but  when  the  moment  came 

Always  they  bated  breath  and  made  their  sport 

Gentle  as  feather- stroke,  that  Agatha 

Might  like  the  waking  for  the  love  it  showed. 

Their  song  made  happy  music  'mid  the  hills, 

For  nature  tuned  their  race  to  harmony, 

And  poet  Hans,  the  tailor,  wrote  them  songs 

That  grew  from  out  their  life,  as  crocuses 

From  out  the  meadow's  moistness.    'Twas  his  song 

They  oft  sang,  wending  homeward  from  a  feast, — 

The  song  I  give  you.    It  brings  in,  you  see. 

Their  gentle  jesting  with  the  three  old  maids 


AGATHA. 


Midnight  by  the  chapel  bell ! 

Homeward,  homeward  all,  farewel!  ' 

I  with  you,  and  you  with  me, 

Miles  are  short  with  company. 

Heart  of  Mary,  bless  the  way\ 
Keep  us  all  by  night  and  day  / 

Moon  and  stars  at  feast  with  night 

Now  have  drunk  their  fill  of  light. 

Home  they  hurry,  making  time 

Trot  apace,  like  merry  rhyme. 

Heart  of  Mary,  mystic  rose^ 
Send  us  all  a  sweet  repose! 

Swiftly  though  the  wood  down  hill, 
Run  till  you  can  hear  the  mill. 
Toin's  ghost  is  wandering  now, 
Shaped  just  like  a  snow-white  cow, 
Heart  of  Mary,  morning  star. 
Ward  off  danger,  near  or  far  ! 

Toin's  wagon  with  its  load 
Fell  and  crushed  him  in  the  road 
'Twixt  these  pine-trees.    Never  fear! 
Give  a  neighbor's  ghost  good  cheer. 

Holy  Babe,  our  God  and  Brother^ 
Bind  us  fast  to  one  another  ! 

Hark !  the  mill  is  at  its  work, 
Now  we  pass  beyond  the  murk 
To  the  hollow,  where  the  moon 
Makes  her  silvery  afternoon. 

Good  Saint  Joseph,  faithful  spouse^ 
Help  us  all  to  keep  our  vows  ! 

Here  the  three  old  maidens  dwell, 

Agatha  and  Kate  and  Nell ; 

See,  the  moon  shines  on  the  thatch, 

We  will  go  and  shake  the  latch. 

Heart  of  Mary,  cup  of  joyy 
Give  us  mirth  without  alloy  ! 

Hush,  'tis  here,  no  noise,  sing  low, 
Rap  with  gentle  knuckles — so  I 


AGATHA. 


^57 


Like  the  little  tapping  birds, 

On  the  door;  then  sing  good  words. 

Meek  Saint  Anna,  old  and  faiVy 
Hallow  all  the  snow-white  hair! 

Little  maidens  old,  sweet  dreams ! 

Sleep  one  sleep  till  morning  beams. 

Mothers  ye,  who  help  us  all, 

Quick  at  hand,  if  ill  befall. 

Holy  Gabrielj  lily-laden^ 

Bless  the  aged  mother-maiden  ! 

Forward,  mount  the  broad  hillside 

Swift  as  soldiers  when  they  ride. 

See  the  two  towers  how  they  peep, 

Round-capped  giants,  o'er  the  steep. 
Heart  of  Mary,  by  thy  sorrow, 
Keep  us  upright  through  the  morrow  ! 

Now  they  rise  quite  suddenly 

Like  a  man  from  bended  knee, 

Now  Saint  Margen  is  in  sight, 

Here  the  roads  branch  off— good-night! 
Heart  of  Mary,  by  thy  grace, 
Give  us  with  the  saints  a  place ! 

i86. 


ARMGART. 

SCENE  I. 

A  salon  lit  with  lamps  and  ornamented  with  green  plants. 
An  open  piano,  with  many  scattered  sheets  of  music. 
Bronze  busts  of  Beethoven  and  Gluch  on  pillars  opposite 
each  other.  A  s^nall  table  spread  with  supper.  To  Frau- 
LEIN  Walpurga,  who  advances  with  a  slight  lameness  of 
gait  from  an  adjoini?ig  room,  enters  Graf  Dornberg  at  the 
opposite  door  J  in  a  travelling  dress. 
Poems.— 9 


258 


ARMGART. 


Graf. 

Good-morning,  Fraulein ! 

Walpurga. 

What,  so  soon  returned  ?  , 
I  feared  your  mission  kept  you  still  at  Prague. 

Graf. 

But  now  arrived !    You  see  my  travelling  dress. 
I  hurried  from  the  panting,  roaring  stream. 
Like  any  courier  of  embassy 
Who  hides  the  fiends  of  war  within  his  bag. 

Walpurga. 
You  know  that  Armgart  sings  to-night  ? 

Graf. 

Has  sung ! 

'Tis  close  on  half-past  nine.    The  Orpheus 
Lasts  not  so  long.    Her  spirits — were  they  high  ? 
Was  Leo  confident  ? 

.  Walpurga. 
He  only  feared 
Some  tameness  at  beginning.    Let  the  house 
Once  ring,  he  said,  with  plaudits,  she  is  safe. 

Graf, 

And  Armgart  ? 

Walpurga. 
She  was  stiller  than  her  wont. 
But  once,  at  some  such  trivial  word  of  mine. 
As  that  the  highest  prize  might  yet  be  won 
By  her  who  took  the  second — she  was  roused. 
*"For  me,"  she  said,  "I  triumph  or  I  fail.  , 
I  never  strove  for  any  second  prize." 

Graf. 

Poor  human-hearted  singing-bird !    She  bears 

Caesar's  ambition  in  her  delicate  breast. 

And  nought  to  still  it  with  but  quivering  song  I 


ARMGART. 


WalpurgA. 
I  had  not  for  the  world  been  there  to-night 
Unreasonable  dread  oft  chills  me  more 
Than  any  reasonable  hope  can  warm. 

Graf. 

You  have  a  rare  affection  for  your  cousin ; 
As  tender  as  a  sister's. 

Walpurga. 

Nay,  I  fear 
My  love  is  little  more  than  what  I  felt 
For  happy  stories  when  I  was  a  child. 
She  fills  my  life  that  would  be  empty  else, 
And  lifts  my  nought  to  value  by  her  side. 

Graf. 

She  is  reason  good  enough,  or  seems  to  be. 
Why  all  were  born  whose  being  ministers 
To  her  completeness.    Is  it  most  her  voice 
Subdues  us  ?  or  her  instinct  exquisite, 
Informing  etch  old  strain  with  some  new  grace 
Which  takes  our  sense  like  any  natural  good? 
Or  most  her  spiritual  energy 
That  sweeps  us  in  the  current  of  her  song  ? 

Walpurga. 

I  know  not.    Losing  either,  we  should  lose 

That  whole  we  call  our  Armgart.    For  herself. 

She  often  wonders  what  her  life  had  been 

Without  that  voice  for  channel  to  her  soul. 

She  says,  it  must  have  leaped  through  all  her  limbs — 

Made  her  a  Maenad — made  her  snatch  a  brand 

And  fire  some  forest,  that  her  rage  might  mount 

In  crashing,  roaring  flames  through  half  a  land, 

Leaving  her  still  and  patient  for  a  while. 

**Poor  wretch!"  she  says,  of  any  murderess — 

<'The  world  was  cruel,  and  she  could  not  sing: 

I  carry  my  revenges  in  my  throat; 

I  love  in  singing,  and  am  loved  again." 


26e 


ARMGART. 


Graf. 

Mere  mood !    I  cannot  yet  believe  it  more. 
Too  much  ambition  has  unwomaned  her; 
But  only  for  a  while.    Her  nature  hides 
One  half  its  treasures  by  its  very  wealth. 
Taxing  the  hours  to  show  it. 

Walpurga. 

Hark!  she  comes. 

Enter  Leo  with  a  wreath  in  his  handy  holding  the  door  open 
for  Armgart,  who  wears  a  furred  mantle  and  hood.  She 
is  followed  by  her  maidj  carrying  an  armful  of  bouquets. 

Leo. 

Place  for  the  queen  of  song! 

Graf  (advancing  towards  Armgart,  who  throws  off  her  hood 
and  mantle y  and  shows  a  star  of  brilliants  in  her  hair). 

A  triumph,  then. 

You  will  not  be  a  niggard  of  your  joy 

And  chide  the  eagerness  that  came  to  share  it. 

Armgart. 

0  kind!  you  hastened  your  return  for  me. 

1  would  you  had  been  there  to  hear  me  sing ! 
Walpurga,  kiss  me :  never  tremble  more 

Lest  Armgart' s  wing  should  fail  her.    She  has  found 

This  night  the  region  where  her  rapture  breathes — 

Pouring  her  passion  on  the  air  made  live 

With  human  heart  throbs.    Tell  them,  Leo,  tell  them 

How  I  outsang  your  hope  and  made  you  cry 

Because  GlUck  could  not  hear  me.    That  was  folly  ! 

He  sang,  not  listened :  every  linked  note 

Was  his  immortal  pulse  that  stirred  in  mine, 

And  all  my  gladness  is  but  part  of  him. 

Give  me  the  wreath. 

[^She  crowns  the  bust  of  Gluck. 
Leo  [sardonically). 

Ay,  ay,  but  mark  you  this, 
It  was  not  part  of  him — that  trill  you  made 
In  spite  of  me  and  reason ! 


ARMGART. 


ArmgART. 

You  were  wrong — 
Dear  Leo,  you  were  wrong :  the  house  was  held 
As  if  a  storm  were  listening  with  delight 
And  hushed  its  thunder. 

Leo. 

Will  you  ask  the  house 
To  teach  you  singing  ?    Quit  your  Orpheus  then, 
And  sing  in  farces  grown  to  operas, 
Where  all  the  prurience  of  the  full-fed  mob 
Is  tickled  with  melodic  impudence : 
Jerk  forth  burlesque  bravuras,  square  your  arms 
Akimbo  with  a  tavern  wench's  grace, 
And  set  the  splendid  compass  of  your  voice 
To  lyric  jigs.    Go  to!  I  thought  you  meant 
To  be  an  artist — lift  your  audience 
To  see  your  vision,  not  trick  forth  a  show 
To  please  the  grossest  taste  of  grossest  numbers. 

Armgart  [taking  up  Leo's  hand,  and  kissing  it). 
Pardon,  good  Leo,  I  am  penitent. 
I  will  do  penance :  sing  a  hundred  trills 
Into  a  deep-dug  grave,  then  burying  them 
As  one  did  Midas'  secret,  rid  myself 
Of  naughty  exultation.    O,  I  trilled 
At  nature's  prompting,  like  the  nightingales. 
Go  scold  them,  dearest  Leo. 

Leo. 

I  stop  my  ears. 
Nature  in  Gliick  inspiring  Orpheus, 
Has  done  with  nightingales.    Are  bird-beaks  lips  ? 

Graf. 

Truce  to  rebukes  !    Tell  us — who  were  not  there — 
The  double  drama :  hov/  the  expectant  house 
Took  the  first  notes. 

Walpurga  {turning  from  her  occupation  of  decking  the 
room  with  the  flowers). 

Yes,  tell  us  all,  dear  Armgart. 


262 


ARMGART. 


Did  you  feel  tremors?    Leo,  how  did  she  look? 
Was  there  a  cheer  to  greet  her? 

Leo. 

Not  a  sound. 

She  walked  like  Orpheus  in  his  solitude, 

And  seemed  to  see  nought  but  what  no  man  saw. 

'Twas  famous.    Not  the  Schroeder-Devrient 

Had  done  it  better.    But  your  blessed  public 

Had  never  any  judgment  in  cold  blood — 

Thinks  all  perhaps  were  better  otherwise, 

Till  rapture  brings  a  reason. 

Armgart  (scornfully), 

I  knew  that! 
The  women  whispered,  *'Not  a  pretty  face !  " 
The  men,  "  Well,  well,  a  goodly  length  of  limb 
She  bears  the  chiton." — It  were  all  the  same 
Were  I  the  Virgin  Mother,  and  my  stage, 
The  opening  heavens  at  the  Judgment-day : 
Gossips  would  peep,  jog  elbows,  rate  the  price 
Of  such  a  woman  in  the  social  mart. 
What  were  the  drama  of  the  world  to  them, 
Unless  they  felt  the  hell-prong  ? 

Leo. 

Peace,  now,  peace ! 
I  hate  my  phrases  to  be  smothered  o'er 
With  sauce  of  paraphrase,  my  sober  tune 
Made  bass  to  rambling  trebles,  showering  down 
An  endless  demi-semi-quavers. 

Armgart  (taking  a  bon-bon  from  the  table ^  uplifting  it  before 
putting  It  into  her  mouthy  and  turning  away). 

Mum! 

Graf. 

Yes,  tell  us  all  the  glory,  leave  the  blame. 

Walpurga. 

You  first,  dear  Leo — what  you  saw  and  heard  ; 
Then  Armgart — she  must  tell  us  what  she  felt. 


ARMGART, 


Leo. 

Well  \    The  first  notes  came  clearly,  firmly  forth. 

And  I  was  easy,  for  behind  those  rills 

I  knew  there  was  a  fountain.    I  could  see 

The  house  was  breathing  gently,  heads  were  still ; 

Parrot  opinion  was  struck  meekly  mute, 

And  human  hearts  were  swelling.    Armgart  stood 

As  if  she  had  been  new-created  there, 

Arid  found  her  voice  which  found  a  melody. 

The  minx  !    Gliick  had  not  written,  nor  I  taught : 

Orpheus  was  Armgart,  Armgart  Orpheus. 

Well,  well,  all  through  the  scena  I  could  feel 

The  silence  tremble  now,  now  poise  itself 

With  added  weight  of  feeling,  till  at  last 

Delight  o'er-toppled  it.    The  final  note 

Had  happy  drowning  in  the  unloosed  roar 

That  surged  and  ebbed  and  ever  surged  again. 

Till  expectation  kept  it  pent  awhile 

Ere  Orpheus  returned.    Pfui !    He  was  changed : 

My  demi-god  was  pale,  had  downcast  eyes 

That  quivered  like  a  bride's  who  fain  would  send 

Backward  the  rising  tear. 

Armgart  (advancing^  but  then  turning  away,  as  if  to  check  her 
speech), 

I  was  a  bride, 

As  nuns  are  at  their  spousals. 

Leo. 

Ay,  my  lady, 
That  moment  will  not  come  again  :  applause 
May  come  and  plenty ;  but  the  first,  first  draught  I 

(Snaps  his  fingers. 
Music  has  sounds  for  it — I  know  no  words. 
I  felt  it  once  myself  when  they  performed 
My  overture  to  Sintram.    Well !  'tis  strange. 
We  know  not  pain  from  pleasure  in  such  joy. 

Armgart  (turning  quickly). 
Oh,  pleasure  has  cramped  dwelling  in  our  souls, 
And  when  full  Being  comes  must  call  on  pain 
To  lend  it  liberal  space. 


264 


ARMGART. 


Walpurga. 

I  hope  the  house 
Kept  a  reserve  of  plaudits  :    I  am  jealous 
Lest  they  had  dulled  themselves  for  coming  good 
That  should  have  seemed  the  better  and  the  best. 

Leo. 

No,  'twas  a  revel  where  they  had  but  quaffed 
Their  opening  cup.    I  think  the  artist's  star, 
His  audience  keeps  not  sober:   once  afire, 
They  flame  towards  climax,  though  his  merit  hold 
But  fairly  even. 

Armgart  {her  hand  on  Leo's  arm). 

Now,  now,  confess  the  truth . 
I  sang  still  better*  to  the  very  end — 
All  save  the  trill ;  I  give  that  up  to  you, 
To  bite  and  growl  at.    Why,  you  said  yourself. 
Each  time  I  sang,  it  seemed  new  doors  were  oped 
That  you  might  hear  heaven  clearer. 

Leo  (shaking  his  finger). 

I  was  raving. 

Armgart. 
1  am  not  glad  with  that  mean  vanity 
Which  knows  no  good  beyond  its  appetite 
Full  feasting  upon  praise  !    I  am  only  glad, 
Being  praised  for  what  I  know  is  worth  the  praise ; 
Glad  of  the  proof  that  I  myself  have  part 
In  what  I  worship  !    At  the  last  applause — 
Seeming  a  roar  of  tropic  winds  that  tossed 
The  handkerchiefs  and  many-colored  flowers. 
Falling  like  shattered  rainbows  all  around — 
Think  you  I  felt  myself  a  prima  donna  f 
No,  but  a  happy,  spiritual  star 
Such  as  old  Dante  saw,  wrought  in  a  rose 
Of  light  in  Paradise,  whose  only  self 
Was  consciousness  of  glory  wide-diffused, 
Music,  life,  power — I  moving  in  the  midst 
With  a  sublime  necessity  of  good. 


ARMGART. 


Leo  {with  a  shrug). 
I  thought  it  was  a  prima  donna  came 
Within  the  side-scenes ;  ay,  and  she  was  proud 
To  find  the  bouquet  from  the  royal  box 
Enclosed  a  jewel-case,  and  proud  to  wear 
A  star  of  brilliants,  quite  an  earthly  star, 
Valued  by  thalers.    Come,  my  lady,  own 
Ambition  has  five  senses,  and  a  self 
That  gives  it  good  warm  lodging  when  it  sinks 
Plump  down  from  ecstasy. 

Armgart. 

Own  it?  why  not? 

Am  I  a  sage  whose  words  must  fall  like  seed 

Silently  buried  toward  a  far-off  spring  ? 

I  sing  to  living  men,  and  my  effect 

Is  Hke  the  summer's  sun,  that  ripens  corn 

Or  now  or  never.    If  the  world  brings  me  gifts, 

Gold,  incense,  myrrh — 'twill  be  the  needful  sign 

That  I  have  stirred  it  as  the  high  year  stirs 

Before  I  sink  to  winter. 

Graf. 

Ecstasies 

Are  short — most  happily !    We  should  but  lose 
Were  Armgart  borne  too  commonly  and  long 
Out  of  the  self  that  charms  us.    Could  I  choose. 
She  were  less  apt  to  soar  beyond  the  reach 
Of  woman's  foibles,  innocent  vanities, 
Fondness  for  trifles  like  that  pretty  star 
Twinkling  beside  her  cloud  of  ebon  hair. 

Armgart  ( Taking  out  the  gem  and  looking  at  it). 

This  little  star!    I  would  it  were  the  seed 

Of  a  whole  Milky  Way,  if  such  bright  shimmer 

Were  the  sole  speech  men  told  their  rapture  with 

At  Armgart's  music.    Shall  I  turn  aside 

From  splendors  which  flash  out  the  glow  I  make. 

And  live  to  make,  in  all  Mie  chosen  breasts 

Of  half  a  Continent  ?    No,  may  it  come. 

That  splendor !    May  the  day  be  near  when  men 


266 


ARMGART. 


Think  much  to  let  my  horses  draw  me  home, 
And  new  lands  welcome  me  upon  their  beach, 
Loving  me  for  my  fame.    That  is  the  truth 
Of  what  I  wish,  nay,  yearn  for.    Shall  I  lie  ? 
Pretend  to  seek  obscurity — to  sing 
In  hope  of  disregard  ?    A  vile  pretence  ! 
And  blasphemy  besides.    For  what  is  fame 
But  the  benignant  strength  of  One,  transformed 
To  joy  of  Many  ?    Tributes,  plaudits  come 
As  necessary  breathing  of  such  joy  ; 
And  may  they  come  to  me! 

Graf. 

The  auguries 

Point  clearly  that  way.    Is  it  no  offence 
To  wish  the  eagle's  wing  may  find  repose, 
As  feebler  wings  do,  in  a  quiet  nest? 
Or  has  the  taste  of  fame  already  turned 
The  Woman  to  a  Muse  .  . 

Leo  {going  to  the  table). 

Who  needs  no  supper? 
I  am  her  priest,  ready  to  eat  her  share 
Of  good  Walpurga's  offerings. 

Walpurga. 

Armgart,  come, 

Graf,  will  you  come  ? 

Graf. 

Thanks,  I  play  truant  here, 
And  must  retrieve  my  self-indulged  delay. 
But  will  the  Muse  receive  a  votary 
At  any  hour  to-morrow? 

Armgart. 

Any  hour 
After  rehearsal,  after  twelve  at  noon. 


f 

ARMGART. 


267 


SCENE  II. 

The  same  Salon,  morning,  Armgart  seated  in  her  bonnet 
and  walking  dress.  The  Graf  standing  near  her  against 
the  piano, 

Graf. 

Armgart,  to  many  minds  the  first  success 

Is  reason  for  desisting.    I  have  known 

A  man  so  versatile,  he  tried  all  arts, 

But  when  in  each  by  turns  he  had  achieved 

Just  so  much  mastery  as  made  men  say, 

"  He  could  be  King  here  if  he  would,"  he  threw 

The  lauded  skill  aside.    He  hates,  said  one. 

The  level  of  achieved  pre-eminence, 

He  must  be  conquering  still;  but  others  said — 

Armgart. 

The  truth,  I  hope:  he  had  a  meagre  soul. 
Holding  no  depth  where  love  could  root  itself. 
''Could  if  he  would?"    True  greatness  ever  wills — 
It  lives  in  wholeness  if  it  live  at  all. 
And  all  its  strength  is  knit  with  constancy. 

Graf. 

He  used  to  say  himself  he  was  too  sane 

To  give  his  life  away  for  excellence 

Which  yet  must  stand,  an  ivory  statuette 

Brought  to  perfection  through  long  lonely  years. 

Huddled  in  the  mart  of  mediocrities. 

He  said,  the  very  finest  doing  wins 

The  admiring  only ;  but  to  leave  undone, 

Promise  and  not  fulfil,  like  buried  youth, 

Wins  all  the  envious,  makes  them  sigh  your  name 

As  that  fair  Absent,  blameless  Possible, 

Which  could  alone  impassion  them ;  and  thus 

Serene  negation  has  free  gift  of  all. 

Panting  achievement  struggles,  is  denied, 


268  ARMGART. 

Or  wins  to  lose  again.    What  say  you,  Armgart  ? 
Truth  has  rough  flavors  if  we  bite  it  through ; 
I  think  this  sarcasm  came  from  out  its  core 
Of  bitter  irony. 

Armgakt. 
It  is  the  truth 
Mean  souls  select  to  feed  upon.    What  then? 
Their  meanness  is  a  truth,  which  I  will  spurn. 
The  praise  I  seek  lives  not  in  envious  breath 
Using  my  name  to  blight  another's  deed. 
I  sing  for  love  of  song,  and  that  renown 
Which  is  the  spreading  act,  the  world-wide  share^ 
Of  good  that  I  was  born  with.    Had  I  failed- — 
Well,  that  had  been  a  truth  most  pitiable, 
I  cannot  bear  to  think  what  life  would  be 
With  high  hope  shrunk  to  endurance,  stunted  aims 
Like  broken  lances  ground  to  eating-knives. 
A  self  sunk  down  to  look  with  level  eyes 
At  low  achievement,  doomed  from  day  to  day 
To  distaste  of  its  consciousness.    But  I  

Graf. 

Have  won,  not  lost,  in  your  decisive  throw 

And  I,  too,  glory  in  this  issue ;  yet, 

The  public  verdict  has  no  potency 

To  sway  my  judgment  of  what  Armgart  is : 

My  pure  delight  in  her  would  be  but  sullied, 

If  it  o'erflowed  with  mixture  of  men's  praise. 

And  had  she  failed,  I  should  have  said,  "  The  pearl 

Remains  a  pearl  for  me,  reflects  the  light 

With  the  same  fitness  that  first  charmed  my  gaze — 

Is  worth  as  fine  a  setting  now  as  then." 

Armgart  {rising). 

Ah,  you  are  good !    But  why  will  you  rehearse 
The  talk  of  cynics,  who  with  insect  eyes 
Explore  the  secrets  of  the  rubbish-heap? 
I  hate  your  epigrams  and  pointed  saws, 
Whose  narrow  truth  is  but  broad  falsity, 
Confess  your  friend  was  shallow 


ARMGART. 


Graf. 

I  confess 

Life  is  not  rounded  in  an  epigram, 

And  saying  aught,  we  leave  a  world  unsaid. 

I  quoted,  merely  to  shape  forth  my  thought 

That  high  success  has  terrors  when  achieved — 

Like  preternatural  spouses,  whose  dire  love 

Hangs  perilous  on  slight  observances  : 

Whence  it  were  possible  that  Armgart  crowned 

Might  turn  and  listen  to  a  pleading  voice, 

Though  Armgart  striving  in  the  race  was  deaf. 

You  said  you  dared  not  think  what  life  had  been 

Without  the  stamp  of  eminence ;  have  you  thought 

How  you  will  bear  the  poise  of  eminence 

With  dread  of  sliding?    Paint  the  future  out 

As  an  unchecked  and  glorious  career, 

'Twill  grow  more  strenuous  by  the  very  love 

You  bear  to  excellence,  the  very  fate 

Of  human  powers,  which  tread  at  every  step 

On  possible  verges. 

Armgart. 

I  accept  the  peril. 
I  choose  to  walk  high  with  sublimer  dread 
Rather  then  crawl  in  safety.    And,  besides, 
I  am  an  artist  as  you  are  a  noble : 
I  ought  to  bear  the  burthen  of  my  rank. 

Graf. 

Such  parallels,  dear  Armgart,  are  but  snares 
To  catch  the  mind  with  seeming  argument — 
Small  baits  of  likeness  'mid  disparity. 
Men  rise  the  higher  as  their  task  is  high. 
The  task  being  well  achieved.    A  woman's  rank 
Lies  in  the  fulness  of  her  womanhood : 
Therein  alone  she  is  royal. 

Armgart. 

Yes,  I  know 
The  oft-taught  Gospel :  "  Woman,  thy  desire 
Shall  be  that  all  superlatives  on  earth 
Belong  to  men,  save  the  one  highest  kind — 


270 


ARMGART, 


To  be  a  mother.    Thou  shall  not  desire 
To  do  aught  best  save  pure  subservience : 
Nature  has  willed  it  so!"    O  blessed  Nature! 
Let  her  be  arbitress ;  she  gave  me  voice 
Such  as  she  only  gives  a  woman  child. 
Best  of  its  kind ;  gave  me  ambition  too, 
That  sense  transcendent  which  can  taste  the  joy 
Of  swaying  multitudes,  of  being  adored 
For  such  achievement,  needed  excellence, 
As  man's  best  art  must  wait  for,  or  be  dumb. 
Men  did  not  say,  when  I  had  sung  last  night, 

'Twas  good,  nay,  wonderful,  considering 
She  is  a  woman" — and  then  turn  to  add, 
"  Tenor  or  baritone  had  sung  her  songs 
Better,  of  course  :  she's  but  a  woman  spoiled.'* 
I  beg  your  pardon,  Graf,  you  said  it 

Graf. 

No! 

How  should  I  say  it,  Armgart?    I,  who  own 
The  magic  of  your  nature-given  art 
As  sweetest  effluence  of  your  womanhood, 
Which,  being  to  my  choice  the  best,  must  find 
The  best  of  utterance.    But  this  I  say : 
Your  fervid  youth  beguiles  you  ;  you  mistake 
A  strain  of  lyric  passion  for  a  life 
Which  in  the  spending  is  a  chronicle 
With  ugly  pages.    Trust  me,  Armgart,  trust  me ; 
Ambition  exquisite  as  yours,  which  soars 
Toward  something  quintessential  you  call  fame, 
Is  not  robust  enough  for  this  gross  world. 
Whose  fame  is  dense  with  false  and  foolish  breath, 
Ardor,  a-twin  with  nice  refining  thought. 
Prepares  a  double  pain.    Pain  had  been  saved. 
Nay,  purer  glory  reached,  had  you  been  throned 
As  woman  only,  holding  all  your  art 
As  attribute  to  that  dear  sovereignty — 
Concentering  your  power  in  home  delights 
Which  penetrate  and  purify  the  world. 

Armgart. 

What  I  leave  the  opera  with  my  part  ill-sung 


ARMGART. 


While  I  was  warbling  in  a  drawing-room  ? 

Sing  in  the  chimney-corner  to  inspire 

My  husband  reading  news?    Let  the  world  hear 

My  music  only  in  his  morning  speech 

Less  stammering  than  most  honorable  men's? 

No !  tell  me  that  my  song  is  poor,  my  art 

The  piteous  feat  of  weakness  aping  strength — 

That  were  fit  proem  to  your  argument. 

Till  then,  I  am  an  artist  by  my  birth — 

By  the  same  warrant  that  I  am  a  woman: 

Nay,  in  the  added  rarer  gift  I  see 

Supreme  vocation  :  if  a  conflict  comes, 

Perish — no,  not  the  woman,  but  the  joys 

Which  men  make  narrow  by  their  narrowness. 

Oh,  I  am  happy !    The  great  masters  write 

For  women's  voices,  and  great  Music  wants  me ! 

I  need  not  crush  myself  within  a  mould 

Of  theory  called  Nature  :  I  have  room 

To  breathe  and  grow  unstunted. 

Graf. 

Armgart,  hear  me. 
I  mean  not  that  our  talk  should  hurry  on 
To  such  collision.    Foresight  of  the  ills 
Thick  shadowing  your  path,  drew  on  my  speech 
Beyond  intention.    True,  I  came  to  ask 
A  great  renunciation,  but  not  this 
Towards  which  my  words  at  first  perversely  strayed, 
As  if  in  memory  of  their  earlier  suit, 

Forgetful  

Armgart,  do  you  remember,  too  ?  the  suit 
Had  but  postponement,  was  not  quite  disdained — 
Was  told  to  wait  and  learn — what  it  has  learned — 
A  more  submissive  speech. 

Armgart  {with  some  agitation). 

Then  it  forgot 
Its  lesson  cruelly.    As  I  remember, 
'Twas  not  to  speak  save  to  the  artist  crowned, 
Nor  speak  to  her  of  casting  off  her  crown. 


272 


ARMGART. 


Graf. 

Nor  will  it,  Armgart.    I  came  not  to  seek 

Any  renunciation  save  the  wife's, 

Which  turns  away  from  other  possible  love 

Future  and  worthier,  to  take  his  love 

Who  asks  the  name  of  husband.    He  who  sought 

Armgart  obscure,  and  heard  her  answer,  *'Wait" — 

May  come  without  suspicion  now  to  seek 

Armgart  applauded. 

Armgart  {turning  towards  him). 

Yes,  without  suspicion 
Of  aught  save  what  consists  with  faithfulness 
In  all  expressed  intent.    Forgive  me,  Graf — 
I  am  ungrateful  to  no  soul  that  loves  me — 
To  you  most  grateful.    Yet  the  best  intent 
Grasps  but  a  living  present  which  may  grow 
Like  any  unfledged  bird.    You  are  a  noble, 
And  have  a  high  career;  just  now  you  said 
'Twas  higher  far  than  aught  a  woman  seeks 
Beyond  mere  womanhood.    Yet  claim  to  be 
More  than  a  husband  but  could  not  rejoice 
That  I  were  more  than  wife.    What  follows,  then? 
You  choosing  me  with  such  persistency 
As  is  but  stretched-out  rashness,  soon  must  find 
Our  marriage  asks  concessions,  asks  resolve 
To  share  renunciation  or  demand  it. 
Either  we  both  renounce  a  mutual  ease. 
As  in  a  nation's  need  both  man  and  wife 
Do  public  services,  or  one  of  us 
Must  yield  that  something  else  for  which  each  lives 
Besides  the  other.    Men  are  reasoners: 
That  premiss  of  superior  claims  perforce 
Urges  conclusion — "  Armgart,  it  is  you." 

Graf. 

But  if  I  say  I  have  considered  this 
With  strict  prevision,  counted  all  the  cost 
Which  that  great  good  of  loving  you  demands — 
Questioned  my  stores  of  patience,  half  resolved 
To  live  resigned  without  a  bliss  whose  threat 


ARMGART. 


Touched  you  as  well  as  me — and  finally, 

With  impetus  of  undivided  will 

Returned  to  say,  "  You  shall  be  free  as  now, 

Only  accept  the  refuge,  shelter,  guard, 

My  love  will  give  you  freedom," — then  your  words 

Are  hard  accusal. 

Armgart. 
Well,  I  accuse  myself. 
My  love  would  be  accomplice  of  your  will. 

Graf. 

Again — my  will? 

Armgart. 

Oh,  your  unspoken  will. 
Your  silent  tolerance  would  torture  me, 
And  on  that  rack  I  should  deny  the  good 
I  yet  believed  in. 

Graf. 
Then  I  am  the  man 
Whom  you  would  love? 

Armgart. 

Whom  I  refuse  to  love! 
No ;  I  will  live  alone  and  pour  my  pain 
With  passion  into  music,  where  it  turns 
To  what  is  best  within  my  better  self. 
I  will  not  take  for  a  husband  one  who  deems 
The  thing  my  soul  acknowledges  as  good — 
The  thing  I  hold  worth  striving,  suffering  for. 
To  be  a  thing  dispensed  with  easily, 
Or  else  the  idol  of  a  mind  infirm. 

Graf. 

Armgart,  you  are  ungenerous ;  you  strain 
My  thought  beyond  its  mark.    Our  difference 
Lies  not  so  deep  as  love — as  union 
Through  a  mysterious  fitness  that  transcends 
Formal  agreement. 


274 


ARMGART. 


Armgart. 
It  lies  deep  enough 
To  chafe  the  union.    If  many  a  man 
Refrains,  degraded,  from  the  utmost  right, 
Because  the  pleadings  of  his  wife's  small  fears 
Are  little  serpents  biting  at  his  heel, — 
How  shall  a  woman  keep  her  steadfastness 
Beneath  a  frost  within  her  husband's  eyes 
Where  coldness  scorches?    Graf,  it  is  your  sorrow 
That  you  love  Armgart.    Nay,  it  is  her  sorrow 
That  she  may  not  love  you. 

Graf. 

Woman,  it  seems, 
Has  enviable  power  to  love  or  not, 
According  to  her  will — 

Armgart. 
She  has  the  will — 
I  have — ^who  am  one  woman — not  to  take 
Disloyal  pledges  that  divide  her  will — 
The  man  who  marries  me  must  wed  my  Art — 
Honor  and  cherish  it,  not  tolerate. 

Graf. 

The  man  is  yet  to  come  whose  theory 

Will  weigh  as  naught  with  you  against  his  love. 

Armgart. 

Whose  theory  will  plead  beside  his  love. 

Graf. 

Himself  a  singer,  then?  who  knows  no  life 
Out  of  the  opera  books,  where  tenor  parts 
Are  found  to  suit  him  ? 

Armgart, 
You  are  bitter,  Graf. 
Forgive  me ;  seek  the  woman  you  deserve, 
All  grace,  all  goodness,  who  has  not  yet  found 


ARMGART. 


275 


A  meaning  in  her  life,  nor  any  end 
Beyond  fulfilling  yours.    The  type  abounds. 

Graf. 

And  happily,  for  the  world. 

Armgart. 

Yes,  happily. 
Let  it  excuse  me  that  my  kind  is  rare  : 
Commonness  is  its  own  security. 

Graf. 

Armgart,  I  would  with  all  my  soul  I  knew 
The  man  so  rare  that  he  could  make  your  life 
As  woman  sweet  to  you,  as  artist  safe. 

Armgart. 
Oh,  I  can  live  unmated,  but  not  live 
Without  the  bliss  of  singing  to  the  world, 
And  feeling  all  my  world  respond  to  me. 

Graf. 

May  it  be  lasting.    Then,  we  two  must  part  ? 

Armgart. 

I  thank  you  from  my  heart  for  all.    Farewell  ! 


SC^NE  III. 

A  Year  Later. 

The  same  Salon,    Walpurga  is  standing  looking  towards 

the  window  with  an  air  of  uneasiness. 
Doctor  Grahn. 

Doctor. 
Were  is  my  patient,  Fraulein  ? 


2/6 


ARMGART. 


Walpurga. 

Fled!  escaped 
Gone  to  rehearsal.    Is  it  dangerous  ? 

Doctor.  - 
No,  no ;  her  throat  is  cured.    I  only  came 
To  hear  her  try  her  voice.    Had  she  yet  sung  ? 

Walpurga. 

No  ;  she  had  meant  to  wait  for  you.    She  said, 
"  The  Doctor  has  a  right  to  my  first  song." 
Her  gratitude  was  full  of  little  plans, 
But  all  were  swept  away  like  gathered  flowers 
By  sudden  storm.    She  saw  this  opera  bill — 
It  was  a  wasp  to  sting  her :  she  turned  pale, 
Snatched  up  her  hat  and  mufflers,  said  in  haste, 

I  go  to  Leo — to  rehearsal — none 
Shall  sing  Fidelio  to-night  but  mel" 
Then  rushed  down  stairs. 

Doctor  {looking  at  his  watch). 
And  this,  not  long  ago  ? 

Walpurga. 

Barely  an  hour. 

Doctor. 
I  will  come  again. 
Returning  from  Charlottenburg  at;  one. 

Walpurga. 
Doctor,  I  feel  a  strange  presentiment. 
Are  you  quite  easy  ? 

Doctor. 

She  can  take  no  harm. 
'Twas  time  for  her  to  sing :  her  throat  is  well. 
It  was  a  fierce  attack,  and  dangerous ; 
I  had  to  use  strong  remedies,  but — well ! 
At  one,  dear  Fraulein,  we  shall  meet  again. 


ARMGART. 


277 


SCENE  IV. 

Two  Hours  Later. 

Walpurga  starts  up,  looking  towards  the  door,  Armgart 
enter Sy  followed  by  Leo.  She  throws  herself  on  a  chair 
which  stands  with  its  back  towards  the  door,  speechless^ 
not  seeming  to  see  anything.  Walpurga  casts  a  question- 
ing terrified  look  at  Leo.  He  shrugs  his  shoulders,  and 
lifts  up  his  hands  behind  Armgart,  who  sits  like  a  helpless 
image,  while  Walpurga  takes  off  her  hat  and  mantle, 

Walpurga. 

Armgart,  dear  Armgart  {kneeling  and  taking  her  hands) ^ 

only  speak  to  me, 
Your  poor  Walpurga.    Oh,  your  hands  are  cold. 
Clasp  mine,  and  warm  them!    I  will  kiss  them  warm. 

(Armgart  looks  at  her  an  instant,  then  draws  away  her 
hands,  and^  turning  aside,  buries  her  face  against  the  back  of 
the  chair y  Walpurga  rising  and  standing  near.) 

(Doctor  Grahn  enters.) 

Doctor. 

News!  stirring  news  to-day!  wonders  come  thick — 

Armgart  (starting  up  at  the  first  sound  of  his  voice,  and 
speaking  vehemently). 

Yes,  thick,  thick,  thick !  and  you  have  murdered  it ! 
Murdered  my  voice — poisoned  the  soul  in  me, 
And  kept  me  living. 

You  never  told  me  that  your  cruel  cures 

Were  clogging  films — a  mouldy,  dead'ning  blight — 

A  lava-mud  to  crust  and  bury  me, 

Yet  hold  me  living  in  a  deep,  deep  tomb. 

Crying  unheard  forever !    Oh,  your  cures 


278 


ARMGART. 


Are  devil's  triumphs:  you  can  rob,  maim,  slay, 
And  keep  a  hell  on  the  other  side  your  cure 
Where  you  can  see  your  victim  quivering 
Between  the  teeth  of  torture — see  a  soul 
Made  keen  by  loss — all  anguish  with  a  good 
Once  known  and  gone !    ( Turns  and  sinks  back  on  her 
chair) 

O  misery,  misery! 
You  might  have  killed  me,  might  have  let  me  sleep 
After  my  happy  day,  and  wake — not  here  1 
In  some  new  unremembered  world, — not  here. 
Where  all  is  faded,  flat — a  feast  broke  off — 
Banners  all  meaningless- — exulting  words 
Dull,  dull — a  drum  that  lingers  in  the  air, 
Beating  to  melody  which  no  man  hears. 

Doctor  (after  a  moment's  silence), 

A  sudden  check  has  shaken  you,  poor  child ! 
All  things  seem  livid,  tottering  to  your  sense. 
From  inward  tumult.    Stricken  by  a  threat, 
You  see  your  terrors  only.    Tell  me,  Leo : 
'Tis  not  such  utter  loss. 

(Leo,  with  a  shrug,  goes  quietly  out) 

The  freshest  bloom, 
Merely,  has  left  the  fruit;  the  fruit  itself  .  .  . 

Armgart. 
Is  ruined,  withered,  is  a  thing  to  hide 
Away  from  scorn  or  pity.    Oh,  you  stand 
And  look  compassionate  now,  but  when  Death  came 
With  mercy  in  his  hands,  you  hindered  him. 
I  did  not  choose  to  live  and  have  your  pity. 
You  never  told  me,  never  gave  me  choice 
To  die  a  singer,  lightning-struck,  unmaimed. 
Or  live  what  you  would  make  me  with  your  cures — 
A  self  accursed  with  consciousness  of  change, 
A  mind  that  lives  in  nought  but  members  lopped, 
A  power  turned  to  pain — as  meaningless 
As  letters  fallen  asunder  that  once  made 


ARMGART. 


A  Hymn  of  rapture.    Oh,  I  had  meaning  once, 
Like  day  and  sweetest  air.    What  am  I  now? 
The  millionth  woman  in  superfluous  herds. 
Why  should  I  be,  do,  think?    'Tis  thistle-seed. 
That  grows  and  grows  to  feed  the  rubbish-heap, 
Leave  me  alone ! 

Doctor. 
Well,  I  will  come  again ; 
Send  for  me  when  you  will,  though  but  to  rate  me. 
That  is  medicinal — a  letting  blood. 

Armgart. 
Oh,  there  is  one  physician,  only  one. 
Who  cures  and  never  spoils.    Him  I  shall  send  for ; 
He  comes  readily. 

Doctor  (to  Walpurga). 

One  word,  dear  Fraulein. 


SCENE  V. 
Armgart,  Walpurga. 
Armgart. 

Walpurga,  have  you  walked  this  morning? 

Walpurga. 

No. 

Armgart. 

Go,  then,  and  walk ;  I  wish  to  be  alone. 

Walpurga. 

I  will  not  leave  you. 

Armgart. 

Will  not,  at  my  wish  ? 


28o 


ARMGART. 


Walpurga. 

Will  not,  because  you  wish  it.    Say  no  more, 
But  take  this  draught. 

Armgart. 

The  Doctor  gave  it  you  ? 

It  is  an  anodyne.    Put  it  away. 

He  cured  me  of  my  voice,  and  now  he  wants 

To  cure  me  of  my  vision  and  resolve — 

Drug  me  to  sleep  that  I  may  wake  again 

Without  a  purpose,  abject  as  the  rest- 

To  bear  the  yoke  of  life.    He  shall  not  cheat  me 

Of  that  fresh  strength  which  anguish  gives  the  soul. 

The  inspiration  of  revolt,  ere  rage 

Slackens  to  faltering.    Now  I  see  the  truth. 

Walpurga  [setting  down  the  glass). 
Then  you  must  see  a  future  in  your  reach, 
With  happiness  enough  to  make  a  dower 
For  two  of  modest  claims. 

Armgart. 

Oh,  you  intone 

That  chant  of  consolation,  wherewith  ease 
Makes  itself  easier  in  the  sight  of  pain. 

Walpurga. 
No ;  I  would  not  console  you,  but  rebuke. 

Armgart. 

That  is  more  bearable.    Forgive  me,  dear. 
Say  what  you  will.    But  now  I  want  to  write. 

(She  rises  and  moves  towards  a  table). 

Walpurga. 
I  say  then,  you  are  simply  fevered,  mad. 
You  cry  aloud  at  horrors  that  would  vanish 
If  you  would  change  the  light,  throw  into  shade 
The  loss  you  aggrandize,  and  let  day  fall 
On  good  remaining,  nay  on  good  refused 


ARMGART. 


Which  may  be  gain  now.    Did  you  not  reject 
A  woman's  lot  more  brilliant,  as  some  held, 
Than  any  singer's?    It  may  still  be  yours. 
Graf  Dornberg  loved  you  well. 

Armgart. 

Not  me,  not  me. 
He  loved  one  well  who  was  like  me  in  all 
Save  in  a  voice  which  made  that  All  unlike 
As  diamond  is  to  charcoal.    Oh,  a  man's  love! 
Think  you  he  loves  a  woman's  inner  self 
Aching  with  loss  of  loveliness  ? — as  mothers 
Cleave  to  the  palpitating  pain  that  dwells 
Within  their  misformed  offspring? 

Walpurga. 

But  the  Graf 

Chose  you  as  simple  Armgart — had  preferred 
That  you  should  never  seek  for  any  fame 
But  such  as  matrons  have  who  rear  great  sons. 
And  therefore  you  rejected  him ;  but  now — 

Armgart. 

Ay,  now — now  he  would  see  me  as  I  am, 

(^She  takes  up  a  hand-mirror) 
Russet  and  songless  as  a  missel-thrush. 
An  ordinary  girl — a  plain  brown  girl, 
Who,  if  some  meaning  flash  from  out  her  words, 
Shocks  as  a  disproportioned  thing — a  Will 
That,  like  an  arm  astretch  and  broken  off, 
Has  nought  to  hurl— the  torso  of  a  soul. 
I  sang  him  into  love  of  me :  my  song 
Was  consecration,  lifted  me  apart 
From  the  crowd  chiselled  like  me,  sister  forms, 
But  empty  of  divineness.    Nay,  my  charm 
Was  half  that  I  could  win  fame  yet  renounce ! 
A  wife  with  glory  possible  absorbed 
Into  her  husband's  actual. 

Walpurga. 

For  shame! 

Armgart,  you  slander  him.    What  would  you  say 


282  ARMGART. 

If  now  he  came  to  you  and  asked  again 
That  you  would  be  his  wife? 

Armgart. 

No,  and  thrice  no ! 
It  would  be  pitying  constancy,  not  love, 
That  brought  him  to  me  now.    I  will  not  be 
A  pensioner  in  marriage.  Sacraments 
Are  not  to  feed  the  paupers  of  the  world. 
If  he  were  generous — I  am  generous,  too. 

Walpurga. 

Proud,  Armgart,  but  not  generous. 


Armgart. 
He  will  not  know  until — 

Walpurga. 


Say  no  more. 


He  knows  already. 
Armgart  [quickly). 


Is  he  come  back  ? 


Walpurga. 
Yes,  and  will  soon  be  here. 
The  Doctor  had  twice  seen  him,  and  would  go 
From  hence  again  to  see  him. 

Armgart. 

Well,  he  knows. 

It  is  all  one. 

Walpurga. 
What  if  he  were  outside? 
I  hear  a  footstep  in  the  ante-room. 

Armgart  {raising  herself  and  assuming  calmness). 
Why  let  him  come,  of  course.    I  shall  behave 
Like  what  I  am.  a  common  personage. 


ARMGART. 


283 


Who  looks  for  nothing  but  civility. 
I  shall  not  play  the  fallen  heroine, 
Assume  a  tragic  part  and  throw  out  cues 
For  a  beseeching  lover. 

Walpurga. 

Some  one  raps. 
{Goes  to  the  door:) 

A  letter — from  the  Graf. 

Armgart. 

Then  open  it. 
(Walpurga  still  offers  it) 

Nay,  my  head  swims.    Read  it.    I  cannot  see. 

(Walpurga  opens  it,  reads  and  pauses.) 

Read  it.    Have  done!    No  matter  what  it  is. 
(Walpurga  reads  in  a  low,  hesitating  voice.) 

"I  am  deeply  moved — my  heart  is  rent,  to  hear  of  your 
illness  and  its  cruel  result,  just  now  communicated  to  me  by 
Dr.  Grahn.  But  surely  it  is  possible  that  this  result  may  not 
be  permanent.  For  youth  such  as  yours.  Time  rnay  hold 
in  store  something  more  than  resignation:  who  shall  say 
that  it  does  not  hold  renewal?  I  have  not  dared  to  ask 
admission  to  you  in  the  hours  of  a  recent  shock,  but  I 
cannot  depart  on  a  long  mission  without  tendering  my 
sympathy  and  my  farewell.  I  start  this  evening  for  the 
Caucasus,  and  thence  I  proceed  to  India,  where  I  am 
intrusted  by  the  Government  with  business,  which  may  be 
of  long  duration." 

(Walpurga  sits  down  dejectedly) 

Armgart  {after  a  slight  shudder,  bitterly.) 
The  Graf  has  much  discretion.    I  am  glad. 
He  spares  us  both  a  pain,  not  seeing  me. 
What  I  like  least  is  that  consoling  hope — 
That  empty  cup,  so  neatly  ciphered  Time," 
Handed  me  as  a  cordial  for  despair. 
{Slowly  and  dreamily)  Time — what  a  word 
charity ! 

Bland,  neutral  word  for  slow,  dull-beating  pain- 


to  fling  as 


284 


ARMGART. 


Days,  months,  and  years ! — If  I  would  wait  for  them. 
(She  takes  up  her  hat  and  puts  it  on,  then  wraps  her 
mantle  round  her.    Walpurga  leaves  the  room.) 
Why,  this  is  but  beginning.    (Walp.  re-enters.)    Kiss  me, 
dear. 

I  am  going  now — alone — out — for  a  walk, 
Say  you  will  never  wound  me  any  more 
With  such  cajolery  as  nurses  use 
To  patients  amorous  of  a  crippled  life. 
Flatter  the  blind :  I  see. 

Walpurga. 

Well,  I  was  wrong. 
In  haste  to  soothe,  I  snatched  at  flickers  merely. 
Believe  me,  I  will  flatter  you  no  more. 

Armgart. 

Bear  witness,  I  am  calm.    I  read  my  lot  , 

As  soberly  as  if  it  were  a  tale 

Writ  by  a  creeping  feuilletonist  and  called, 

"The  Woman's  Lot:  a  Tale  of  Everyday:" 

A  middling  woman's,  to  impress  the  world 

With  high  superfluousness ;  her  thoughts  a  crop 

Of  chick-weed,  errors  or  of  pot-herb  facts. 

Smiled  at  like  some  child's  drawing  on  a  slate. 

"Genteel?"    "O  yes,  gives  lessons;  not  so  good 

As  any  man's  would  be,  but  cheaper  far." 

"Pretty?"    ''No:  yet  she  makes  a  figure  fit 

For  good  society.    Poor  thing,  she  sews 

Both  late  and  early,  turns  and  alters  all 

To  suit  the  changing  mode.    Some  widower 

Might  do  well,  marrying  her ;  but  in  these  days ! 

Well,  she  can  somewhat  eke  her  narrow  gains 

By  writing,  just  to  furnish  her  with  gloves 

And  droschkies  in  the  rain.    They  print  her  things 

Often  for  charity." — Oh,  a  dog's  life  ! 

A  harnessed  dog's,  that  draws  a  little  cart 

Voted  a  nuisance  !   I  am  going  now. 

Walpurga. 
Not  now,  the  door  is  locked. 


ARMGART. 


285 


Armgart. 

Give  me  the  key  ! 

Walpurga. 

Locked  on  the  outside.    Gretchen  has  the  key : 
She  is  gone  on  errands. 

Armgart. 
What,  you  dare  to  keep  me 

Your  prisoner  ? 

Walpurga. 
And  have  I  not  been  yours? 
Your  wish  has  been  a  bolt  to  keep  me  in. 
Perhaps  that  middling  woman  whom  you  paint 
With  far-off  scorn  

Armgart. 

I  paint  what  I  must  be. 
What  is  my  soul  to  me  without  the  voice 
That  gave  it  freedom  ? — gave  it  one  grand  touch, 
And  made  it  nobly  human  ?— Prisoned  now. 
Prisoned  in  all  the  petty  mimicries 
Called  woman's  knowledge,  that  will  fit  the  world 
As  doll-clothes  fit  a  man.    I  can  do  naught 
Better  than  what  a  million  women  do — 
Must  drudge  among  the  crowd  and  feel  my  life 
Beating  upon  the  world  without  response; 
Beating  with  passion  through  an  insect's  horn 
That  moves  a  millet-seed  laboriously. 
If  1  would  do  it  ! 

Walpurga  [coldly). 

And  why  should  you  not  ? 

Armgart  (turning  quickly). 
Because  Heaven  made  me  royal — wrought  me  out 
With  subtle  finish  towards  pre-eminence, 
Made  every  channel  of  my  soul  converge 
To  one  high  function,  and  then  flung  me  down, 
That  breaking  I  might  turn  to  subtlest  pain. 


286 


ARMGART. 


An  inborn  passion  gives  a  rebel's  right: 
I  would  rebel  and  die  in  twenty  worlds 
Sooner  than  bear  the  yoke  of  thwarted  life. 
Each  keenest  sense  turned  into  keen  distaste, 
Hunger  not  satisfied  but  kept  alive, 
Breathing  in  languor  half  a  century. 
All  the  world  now  is  but  a  rack  of  threads 
To  twist  and  dwarf  me  into  pettiness 
And  basely  feigned  content  the  placid  mask 
Of  women's  misery. 

Walpurga  {indignantly). 

Ay,  such  a  mask 
As  the  few  born  like  you  to  easy  joy, 
Cradled  in  privilege,  take  for  natural 
On  all  the  lowly  faces  that  must  look 
Upward  to  you  !    What  revelation  now 
Shows  you  the  mask  or  gives  presentiment 
Of  sadness  hidden?    You,  who  every  day 
These  five  years  saw  me  limp  to  wait  on  you, 
And  thought  the  order  perfect  which  gave  me^ 
The  girl  without  pretension  to  be  aught, 
A  splendid  cousin  for  my  happiness: 
To  watch  the  night  through  when  her  brain  was  fired 
With  too  much  gladness — listen,  always  listen 
To  what  she  felt,  who  having  power  had  right 
To  feel  exorbitantly,  and  submerge 
The  souls  around  her  with  the  poured-out  flood 
Of  what  must  be  ere  she  were  satisfied! 
That  was  feigned  patience,  was  it  ?    Why  not  love, 
Love  nurtured  even  with  that  strength  of  self 
Which  found  no  room  save  in  another's  life  ? 
Oh,  such  as  I  know  joy  by  negatives. 
And  all  their  deepest  passion  is  a  pang 
Till  they  accept  their  pauper's  heritage. 
And  meekly  live  from  out  the  general  store 
Of  joy  they  were  born  stripped  of.    I  accept- 
Nay,  now  would  sooner  choose  it  than  the  wealth 
Of  natures  you  call  royal,  who  can  live 
In  mere  mock  knowledge  of  their  fellows'  woe, 
Thinking  their  smiles  may  heal  it. 


ARMGART. 


287 


Armgart  {tremulously). 

Nay,  Walpurga, 

I  did  not  make  a  palace  of  my  joy 
To  shut  the  world's  truth  from  me.    All  my  good 
Was  that  I  touched  the  world  and  made  a  part 
In  the  world's  dower  of  beauty,  strength,  and  bliss; 
It  was  the  glimpse  of  consciousness  divine 
Which  pours  out  day  and  sees  the  day  is  good. 
Now  I  am  fallen  dark ;  I  sit  in  gloom, 
Remembering  bitterly.    Yet  you  speak  truth ; 
I  wearied  you,  it  seems ;  took  all  your  help 
As  cushioned  nobles  use  a  weary  serf, 
Not  looking  at  his  face. 

Walpurga. 

Oh,  I  but  stand 
As  a  small  symbol  for  the  mighty  sum 
Of  claims  unpaid  to  needy  myriads; 
I  think  you  never  set  your  loss  beside 
That  mighty  deficit.    Is  your  work  gone — 
The  prouder  queenly  work  that  paid  itself. 
And  yet  was  overpaid  with  men's  applause? 
Are  you  no  longer  chartered,  privileged, 
But  sunk  to  simple  woman's  penury. 
To  ruthless  Nature's  chary  average — 
Where  is  the  rebel's  right  for  you  alone  ? 
Noble  rebellion  lifts  a  common  load: 
But  what  is  he  who  flings  his  own  load  off 
And  leaves  his  fellows  toiling?    Rebel's  right? 
Say  rather,  the  deserter's.    Oh,  you  smiled 
From  your  clear  height  on  all  the  million  lots 
Which  yet  you  brand  as  abject. 

ArmgArt. 

I  was  blind 

With  too  much  happiness :  true  vision  comes 
Only,  it  seems,  with  sorrow.    Were  there  one 
This  moment  near  me,  suffering  what  I  feel, 
And  needing  me  for  comfort  in  her  pang — 
Then  it  were  worth  the  while  to  live;  not  else. 


288 


ARMGART. 


Walpurga. 

One — near  you — why,  they  throng !  you  hardly  stir 

But  your  act  touches  them.    We  touch  afar. 

For  did  not  swarthy  slaves  of  yesterday 

Leap  in  their  bondage  at  the  Hebrews'  flight, 

Which  touched  them  through  the  thrice  millennial  dark  ? 

But  you  can  find  the  sufferer  you  need 

With  touch  less  subtle. 

Armgart. 

Who  has  need  of  me  ? 

Walpurga. 

Love  finds  the  need  it  fills.    But  you  are  hard. 

Armgart. 

Is  it  not  you,  Walpurga,  who  are  hard  ? 
You  humored  all  my  wishes  till  to-day, 
When  fate  has  blighted  me. 

Walpurga. 

You  would  not  hear 
The  "  chant  of  consolation  : "  words  of  hope 
Only  embittered  you.    Then  hear  the  truth — 
A  lame  girl's  truth,  whom  no  one  ever  praised 
For  being  cheerful.    "  It  is  well,"  they  said  : 
"  Were  she  cross-grained  she  could  not  be  endured." 
A  word  of  truth  from  her  had  startled  you ; 
But  you — you  claimed  the  universe ;  naught  less 
Than  all  existence  working  in  sure  tracks 
Towards  your  supremacy.    The  wheels  might  scathe 
A  myriad  destinies — nay,  must  perforce ; 
But  yours  they  must  keep  clear  of;  just  for  you 
The  seething  atoms  through  the  firmament 
Must  bear  a  human  heart — which  you  had  not ! 
For  what  is  it  to  you  that  women,  men, 
Plod,  faint,  are  weary,  and  espouse  despair 
Of  aught  but  fellowship  ?    Save  that  you  spurn 
To  be  among  them  ?    Now,  then,  you  are  lame — 
Maimed,  as  you  said,  and  levelled  with  the  crowd : 
Call  it  new  birth — birth  from  that  monstrous  Self, 


ARMGART.  289 

Which,  smiling  down  upon  a  race  oppressed, 
Says,  "  All  is  good,  for  I  am  throned  at  ease," 
Dear  Armgart — nay,  you  tremble — I  am  cruel. 

Armgart. 

0  no  \  hark !    Some  one  knocks.    Come  in  ! — come  in ! 

(Enter  Leo.) 

Leo. 

See,  Gretchen  let  me  in.    I  could  not  rest 
Longer  away  from  you. 

Armgart. 

Sit  down,  dear  Leo. 
Walpurga,  I  would  speak  with  him  alone. 

(Walpurga  goes  out) 

Leo  (hesitatingly). 

You  mean  to  walk  ? 

Armgart. 

No,  I  shah  stay  within. 
[She  takes  off  her  hat  and  mantle ^  and  sits  down  immediately. 

After  a  pause,  speaking  in  a  subdued  tone  to  Leo.) 
How  old  are  you  ? 

Leo. 

Threescore  and  five. 

Armgari 

That  9  old, 

1  never  thought  till  now  how  you  have  lived. 
They  hardly  ever  play  your  music  ? 

Leo  {raisifig  kzs  eyebrows  and  throwing  out  his  lip). 

No! 

Schubert,  too,  wrote  for  silence  :  half  his  work 
Lay  like  a  frozen  Rhine  till  summers  came 
That  warmed  the  grass  above  him.    Even  so  ! 
His  music  lives  now  with  a  mighty  youth. 

Poems. — 10 


290 


ARMGART, 


Armgart. 

Do  you  think  yours  will  live  when  you  are  dead? 

Leo. 

Pfui !    The  time  was,  I  drank  that  home-brewed  wine 
And  found  it  heady,  while  my  blood  was  young  . 
Now  it  scarce  warms  me.    Tipple  it  as  I  may, 
I  am  sober  still,  and  say :    "  My  old  friend  Leo, 
Much  grain  is  wasted  in  the  world  and  rots ; 
Why  not  thy  handful  ?  " 

Armgart. 
Strange !  since  I  have  known 
Till  now  I  never  wondered  how  you  lived. 
When  I  sang  well — that  was  your  jubilee. 
But  you  were  old  already. 

Leo. 

Yes,  childj  yes: 
Youth  thinks  itself  the  goal  of  each  old  life ; 
Age  has  but  travelled  from  a  far-off  time 
Just  to  be  ready  for  youth's  service.    Well ! 
It  was  my  chief  delight  to  perfect  you. 

Armgart. 

Good  Leo  !    You  have  Hved  on  little  joys. 

But  your  delight  in  me  is  crushed  for  ever 

Your  pains,  where  are  they  now  ?    They  shapea  intent 

Which  action  frustrates ;  shaped  an  inward  sense 

Which  is  but  keen  despair,  the  agony 

Of  highest  vision  in  the  lowest  pit. 

Leo. 

Nay,  nay,  I  have  a  thought :  keep  to  the  stage. 
To  drama  without  song  ;  for  you  can  act — 
Who  knows  how  well,  when  all  the  soul  is  poured 
Into  that  sluice  alone  ? 

Armgart. 

I  know,  and  you  • 
The  second  or  third  best  in  tragedies 


ARMGART, 


291 


That  cease  to  touch  the  fibre  of  the  time. 

No ;  song  is  gone,  but  nature's  other  gift, 

Self-judgment,  is  not  gone.    Song  was  my  speech, 

And  with  its  impulse  only,  action  came  : 

Song  was  the  battle's  onset,  when  cool  purpose 

Glows  into  rage,  becomes  a  warring  god 

And  moves  the  limbs  with  miracle.    But  now — 

Oh,  I  should  stand  hemmed  in  with  thoughts  and  rules — 

Say  '<This  way  passion  acts,"  yet  never  feel 

The  might  of  passion.    How  should  I  declaim  ? 

As  monsters  write,  with  feet  instead  of  hands. 

I  will  not  feed  on  doing  great  tasks  ill, 

Dull  the  world's  sense  with  mediocrity, 

And  live  by  trash  that  smothers  excellence. 

One  gift  I  had  that  ranked  me  with  the  best — 

The  secret  of  my  frame — and  that  is  gone. 

For  all  life  now  I  am  a  broken  thing. 

But  silence  there!    Good  Leo,  advise  me  now. 

I  would  take  humble  work  and  do  it  well — 

Teach  music,  singing^what  I  can — not  here. 

But  in  some  smaller  town  where  I  may  bring 

The  method  you  have  taught  me,  pass  your  gift 

To  others  who  can  use  it  for  delight. 

You  think  I  can  do  that  ? 

(She  pauses  with  a  sob  in  her  voice.) 

Leo. 

Yes,  yes,  dear  child ! 
And  it  were  yell,  perhaps,  to  change  the  place — 
Begin  afresh,  as  I  did  when  I  left 
Vienna  with  a  heart  half  broken. 

Armgart  (roused  by  surprise^ 

You? 

Leo. 

Well,  it  is  long  ago.    But  I  had  lost — 
No  matter !    We  must  bury  our  dead  joys 
And  live  above  them  with  a  living  world. 
But  whither,  think  you,  you  would  like  to  go  ? 


292 


ARMGART. 


Armgart. 

To  Freiburg. 

>  Leo. 

In  the  Breisgau  ?    And  why  there  ? 
It  is  too  small. 

Armgart. 
Walpurga  was  born  there, 
And  loves  the  place.    She  quitted  it  for  me 
These  five  years  past.    Now  I  will  take  her  there. 
Dear  Leo,  I  will  bury  my  dead  joy. 

Leo. 

Mothers  do  so,  bereaved ;  then  learn  to  love 
Another's  living  child. 

Armgart. 

Oh,  it  is  hard 
To  take  the  little  corpse,  and  lay  it  low, 
And  say,  "  None  misses  it  but  me." 
She  sings  .    .  . 
I  mean,  PauHna  sings  Fidelio, 
And  they  will  welcome  her  to-night. 

Leo. 

Well,  well. 

Tis  better  that  our  griefs  should  not  spread  far. 
1870. 


HOW  LISA  LOVED  THE  KING. 


Six  hundred  years  ago,  in  Dante's  time, 

Before  his  cheek  was  furrowed  by  deep  rhyme — 

When  Europe,  fed  afresh  from  Eastern  story, 

Was  Hke  a  garden  tangled  with  the  glory 

Of  flowers  hand-planted  and  of  flowers  air-sown, 

Climbing  and  trailing,  budding  and  full-blown; 

Where  purple  bells  are  tossed  amid  pink  stars, 

And  springing  blades,  green  troops  in  innocent  wars, 

Crowd  every  shady  spot  of  teeming  earth. 

Making  invisible  motion  visible  birth — 

Six  hundred  years  ago,  Palermo  town 

Kept  holiday.    A  deed  of  great  renown, 

A  high  revenge,  had  freed  it  from  the  yoke 

Of  hated  Frenchmen,  and  from  Calpe's  rock 

To  where  the  Bosporus  caught  the  earlier  sun 

'  Twas  told  that  Pedro,  King  of  Aragon, 

Was  welcomed  master  of  all  Sicily : 

A  royal  knight,  supreme  as  kings  should  be 

In  strength  and  gentleness  that  make  high  chivalry. 

Spain  was  the  favorite  home  of  knightly  grace. 

Where  generous  men  rode  steeds  of  generous  race. 

Both  Spanish,  yet  half  Arab,  both  inspired 

By  mutual  spirit,  that  each  motion  fired 

With  beauteous  response,  like  minstrelsy 

Afresh  fulfilling  fresh  expectancy. 

So  when  Palermo  made  high  festival, 

The  joy  of  matrons  and  of  maidens  all 

Was  the  mock  terror  of  the  tournament  ; 

Where  safety,  with  the  glimpse  of  danger  blent, 

Took  exultation  as  from  epic  song, 

Which  greatly  tells  the  pains  that  to  great  life  belong. 

And  in  all  eyes  King  Pedro  was  the  king 

Of  cavaliers :  as  in  a  full-gemmed  ring 

The  largest  ruby,  or  as  that  bright  star 


294 


HO  W  LISA  LO  VED  THE  KING. 


Whose  shining  shows  us  where  the  Hyads  are. 

His  the  best  jennet,  and  he  sat  it  best; 

His  weapon,  whether  tilting  or  in  rest, 

Was  worthiest  watching,  and  his  face  once  seen 

Gave  to  the  promise  of  his  royal  mein 

Such  rich  fulfilment,  as  the  opened  eyes 

Of  a  loved  sleeper,  or  the  long-watched  rise 

Of  vernal  day,  whose  joy  o'er  stream  and  meadow  flies. 

But  of  the  maiden  forms  that  thick  enwreathed 

The  broad  piazza  and  sweet  witchery  breathed, 

With  innocent  faces  budding  all  arow 

From  balconies  and  windows  high  and  low, 

Who  was  it  felt  the  deep  mysterious  glow, 

The  impregnation  with  supernal  fire 

Of  young  ideal  love — transformed  desire, 

Whose  passion  is  but  worship  of  that  Best 

Taught  by  the  many-mingled  creed  of  each  young  breast? 

'  Twas  gentle  Lisa,  of  no  noble  line. 

Child  of  Bernardo,  a  rich  Florentine, 

Who  from  his  merchant- city  hither  came 

To  trade  in  drugs ;  yet  kept  an  honest  fame, 

And  had  the  virtue  not  to  try  and  sell 

Drugs  that  had  none.    He  loved  his  riches  well, 

But  loved  them  chiefly  for  his  Lisa's  sake. 

Whom  with  a  father's  care  he  sought  to  make 

The  bride  of  some  true  honorable  man : — 

Of  Perdicone  (so  the  rumor  ran). 

Whose  birth  was  higher  than  his  fortunes  were;. 

For  still  your  trader  likes  a  mixture  fair 

Of  blood  that  hurries  to  some  higher  strain 

Than  reckoning  money's  loss  and  money's  gain. 

And  of  such  mixture  good  may  surely  come; 

Lords'  scions  so  may  learn  to  cast  a  sum, 

A  trader's  grandson  bear  a  well-set  head. 

And  have  less  conscious  manners,  better  bred, 

Nor,  when  he  tries  to  be  polite,  to  be  rude  instead. 

'  Twas  Perdicone's  friends  made  overtures 
To  good  Bernardo ;  so  one  dame  assures 
Her  neighbor  dame,  who  notices  the  youth 
Fixing  his  eyes  on  Lisa;  and  in  truth 


HOW  LISA  LOVED  THE  KING. 


Eyes  that  could  see  her  on  this  summer  day 

Might  find  it  hard  to  turn  another  way. 

She  had  a  pensive  beauty,  yet  not  sad; 

Rather,  Hke  minor  cadences  that  glad 

The  hearts  of  little  birds  amid  spring  boughs; 

And  oft  the  trumpet  or  the  joust  would  rouse 

Pulses  that  gave  her  cheek  a  finer  glow, 

Parting  her  lips  that  seemed  a  mimic  bow 

By  chiselling  Love  for  play  in  coral  wrought. 

Then  quickened  by  him  with  the  passionate  thought. 

The  soul  that  trembled  in  the  lustrous  night 

Of  slow,  long  eyes.    Her  body  was  so  slight, 

It  seemed  she  could  have  floated  in  the  sky, 

And  with  the  angelic  choir  made  symphony; 

But  in  her  cheek's  rich  tinge,  and  in  the  dark 

Of  darkest  hair  and  eyes,  she  bore  a  mark 

Of  kinship  to  her  generous  mother  earth, 

The  fervid  land  that  gives  the  plumy  palm-trees  birth. 

She  saw  not  Perdicone;  her  young  mind 

Dreamed  not  that  any  man  had  ever  pined 

For  such  a  little  simple  mai-d  as  she : 

She  had^but  dreamed  how  heavenly  it  would  be 

To  love  some  hero,  noble,  beauteous,  great, 

Who  would  live  stories  worthy  to  narrate. 

Like  Roland,  or  the  warriors  of  Troy, 

The  Cid,  or  Amodis,  or  that  fair  boy 

Who  conquered  everything  beneath  the  sun, 

And  somehow,  sometime,  died  at  Babylon, 

Fighting  the  Moors.    For  heroes  all  were  good 

And  fair  as  that  archangel  who  withstood 

The  Evil  One,  the  author  of  all  wrong — 

That  Evil  One  who  made  the  French  so  strong; 

And  now  the  flower  of  heroes  must  be  he 

Who  drove  those  tyrants  from  dear  Sicily, 

So  that  her  maids  might  walk  to  vespers  tranquilly. 

Young  Lisa  saw  this  hero  in  the  king. 

And  as  wood-lilies  that  sweet  odors  bring 

Might  dream  the  light  that  opes  their  modest  eyne 

Was  lily-odored,— and  as  rites  divine. 

Round  turf-laid  altars,  or  'neath  roofs  of  stone, 

Draw  sanctity  from  out  the  heart  alone 


w 

296  iro  W  LISA  L  0  VED  THE  KING, 

That  loves  and  worships,  so-  the  miniature 
.Perplexed  of  her  soul's  world,  all  virgin  pure, 
Filled  with  heroic  virtues  that  bright  form, 
Raona's  royalty,  the  finished  norm 
Of  horsemanship — the  half  of  chivalry : 
For  how  could  generous  men  avengers  be, 
Save  as  God's  messengers  on  coursers  fleet? — 
These,  scouring  earth,  made  Spain  with  Syria  meet 
In  one  self  world  where  the  same  right  had  sway. 
And  good  must  grow  as  grew  the  blessed  day. 
No  more  ;  great  Love  his  essence  had  endued 
With  Pedro's  form,  and  entering,  subdued 
The  soul  of  Lisa,  fervid  and  intense. 
Proud  in  its  choice  of  proud  obedience 
To  hardship  glorified  by  perfect  reverence. 

Sweet  Lisa  homeward  carried  that  dire  guest. 
And  in  her  chamber  through  the  hours  of  rest 
The  darkness  was  alight  for  her  with  sheen 
Of  arms,  and  plumed  helm,  and  bright  between 
Their  commoner  gloss,  like  the  pure  living  spring 
'Twixt  porphyry  lips,  or  living  bird's  bright  wing 
'Twixt  golden  wires,  the  glances  of  the  king 
Flashed  on  her  soul,  and  waked  vibrations  there 
Of  known  delights  love-mixed  to  new  and  rare: 
The  impalpable  dream  was  turned  to  breathing  flesh 
Chill  thought  of  summer  to  the  warm  close  mesh 
Of  sunbeams  held  between  the  citron  leaves. 
Clothing  her  Hfe  of  Hfe.    Oh,  she  believes 
That  she  could  be  content  if  he  but  knew 

S~{er  poor  small  self  could  claim  no  other  due,) 
ow  Lisa's  lowly  love  had  highest  reach 
Of  winged  passion,  whereto  winged  speech 
Would  be  scorched  remnants  left  by  mounting  flame. 
Though,  had  she  such  lame  message,  were  it  blame 
To  tell  what  greatness  dwelt  in  her,  what  rank 
She  held  in  loving?    Modest  maidens  shrank 
From  telHng  love  that  fed  on  selfish  hope; 
But  love  as  hopeless  as  the  shattering  song 
Wailed  for  loved  beings  who  have  joined  the  throng 
Of  mighty  dead  ones.  .  .  .  Nay,  but  she  was  weak- 
Knew  only  prayers  and  ballads — could  not  speak 


HOW  LISA  LOVED  THE  KING, 


With  eloquence  save  what  dumb  creatures  have, 
That  with  small  cries  and  touches  small  boons  crave. 

She  watched  all  day  that  she  might  see  him  pass 

With  knights  and  ladies,  but  she  said,  "Alas! 

Though  he  should  see  me,  it  were  all  as  one 

He  saw  a  pigeon  sitting  on  the  stone 

Of  wall  or  balcony  :  some  colored  spot 

His  eye  just  sees,  his  mind  regardeth  not. 

I  have  no  music-touch  that  could  bring  nigh 

My  love  to  his  soul's  hearing.    I  shall  die, 

And  he  will  never  know  who  Lisa  was — 

The  trader's  child,  whose  soaring  spirit  rose 

As  hedge-born  aloe-flowers  that  rarest  years  disclose. 

"For  were  I  now  a  fair  deep-breasted  queen 

A-horseback,  with  blonde  hair,  and  tunic  green 

Gold-bordered  like  Costanza,  I  should  need 

No  change  within  to  make  me  queenly  there; 

For  they  the  royal-hearted  women  are 

Who  nobly  love  the  noblest,  yet  have  grace 

For  needy  suffering  lives  in  lowliest  place, 

Carrying  a  choicer  sunlight  in  their  smile, 

The  heavenliest  ray  that  pitieth  the  vile. 

My  love  is  such,  it  cannot  choose  but  soar 

Up  to  the  highest ;  yet  for  evermore, 

Though  I  were  happy,  throned  beside  the  king, 

I  should  be  tender  to  each  little  thing 

With  hurt  warm  breast,  that  had  no  speech  to  tell 

Its  inward  pang,  and  I  would  sooth  it  well 

With  tender  touch  and  with  a  low  soft  moan 

For  company  :  my  dumb  love-pang  is  lone, 

Prisoned  as  topaz-beam  within  a  rough-garbed  stone." 

So,  inward-wailing,  Lisa  passed  her  days. 

Each  night  the  August  moon  with  changing  phase 

Looked  broader,  harder  on  her  unchanged  pain  ; 

Each  noon  the  heat  lay  heavier  again 

On  her  despair  ;  until  her  body  frail 

Shrank  like  the  snow  that  watchers  in  the  vale 

See  narrowed  on  the  height  each  summer  morn  : 

While  her  dark  glance  burnt  larger,  more  forlorn, 


298 


HOW  LISA  LOVED  THE  KING. 


As  if  the  soul  within  her  all  on  fire 

Made  of  her  being  one  swift  funeral  pyre. 

Father  and  mother  saw  with  sad  dismay 

The  meaning  of  their  riches  melt  away  : 

For  without  Lisa  what  would  sequins  buy  ? 

What  wish  were  left  if  Lisa  were  to  die  ? 

Through  her  they  cared  for  summers  still  to  come, 

Else  they  would  be  as  ghosts  without  a  home 

In  any  flesh  that  could  feel  glad  desire. 

They  pay  the  best  physicians,  never  tire 

Of  seeking  what  will  soothe  her,  promising 

That  aught  she  longed  for,  though  it  were  a  thing 

Hard  to  be  come  at  as  the  Indian  snow, 

Or  roses  that  on  alpine  summits  blow — 

It  should  be  hers.    She  answers  with  low  voice, 

She  longs  for  death  alone — death  is  her  choice ; 

Death  is  the  King  who  never  did  think  scorn, 

But  rescues  every  meanest  soul  to  sorrow  born. 

Yet  one  day,  as  they  bent  above  her  bed 

And  watched  her  in  brief  sleep,  her  drooping  head 

Turned  gently,  as  the  thirsty  flowers  that  feel 

Some  moist  revival  through  their  petals  steal, 

And  httle  flutterings  of  her  lids  and  lips 

Told  of  such  dreamy  joy  as  sometimes  dips 

A  skyey  shadow  in  the  mind's  poor  pool. 

She  oped  her  eyes,  and  turned  their,  dark  gems  full 

Upon  her  father,  as  in  utterance  dumb 

Of  some  new  prayer  that  in  her  sleep  had  come. 

What  is  it,  Lisa  ?  "    "  Father,  I  would  see 
Minuccio,  the  great  sing^er  ;  bring  him  me.*' 
For  always,  night  and  day,  her  unstilled  thought, 
Wandering  all  o'er  its  little  world,  had  sought 
How  she  could  reach,  by  some  soft  pleading  touch. 
King  Pedro's  soul,  that  she  who  loved  so  much 
Dying,  might  have  a  place  within  his  mind — 
A  little  grave  which  he  would  sometimes  find 
And  plant  some  flower  on  it — some  thought  some 
kind. 

Till  in  her  dream  she  saw  Minuccio 
Touching  his  viola,  and  chanting  low 
A  strain  that,  falling  on  her  brokenly, 


HO  W  LISA  LO  VED  THE  KING, 


299 


Seemed  blossoms  lightly  blown  from  off  a  tree, 
Each  burthened  with  a  word  that  was  a  scent — 
Raona,  Lisa,  love,  death,  tournament; 
Then  in  her  dream  she  said,    He  sings  of  me — 
Might  be  my  messenger ;  ah,  now  I  see 

The  king  is  Hstening  "    Then  she  awoke, 

And,  missing  her  dear  dream,  that  new-born  longing  spoke 

She  longed  for  music :  that  was  natural ; 

Physicians  said  it  was  medicinal ; 

The  humors  might  be  schooled  by  true  consent 

Of  a  fine  tenor  and  fine  instrument ; 

In  brief,  good  music,  mixed  with  doctor's  stuff — 

Apollo  with  Asklepios — enough  ! 

Minuccio,  entreated,  gladly  came. 

(He  was  a  singer  of  most  gentle  fame — 

A  noble,  kindly  spirit,  not  elate 

That  he  was  famous,  but  that  song  was  great — 

Would  sing  as  finely  to  this  suffering  child 

As  at  the  court  where  princes  on  him  smiled.) 

Gently  he  entered  and  sat  down  by  her, 

Asking  what  sort  of  strain  she  would  prefer — 

The  voice  alone,  or  voice  with  viol  wed; 

Then,  when  she  chose  the  last,  he  preluded 

With  magic  hand,  that  summoned  from  the  strings 

Aerial  spirits,  rare  yet  vibrant  wings 

That  fanned  the  pulses  of  his  listener, 

And  waked  each  sleeping  sense  with  blissful  stir. 

Her  cheek  already  showed  a  slow  faint  blush, 

But  soon  the  voice,  in  pure  full  Hquid  rush, 

Made  all  the  passion,  that  till  now  she  felt. 

Seem  but  cool  waters  that  in  warmer  melt. 

Finished  the  song,  she  prayed  to  be  alone 

With  kind  Minuccio ;  for  her  faith  had  grown 

To  trust  him  as  if  missioned  like  a  priest 

With  some  high  grace,  that  when  his  singing  ceased 

Still  made  him  wiser,  more  magnanimous 

Than  common  men  who  had  no  genius. 

So  laying  her  small  hand  within  his  palm, 
She  told  him  how  that  secret  glorious  harm 
Of  loftiest  loving  had  befallen  her; 


300  HOW  LISA  LOVED  THE  KING. 

That  death,  her  only  hope,  most  bitter  were, 

If  when  she  died  her  love  must  perish,  too, 

As  songs  unsung  and  thoughts  unspoken  do, 

Which  else  might  live  within  another  breast. 

She  said,  "  Minuccio,  the  grave  were  rest, 

If  I  were  sure,  that  lying  cold  and  lone, 

My  love,  my  best  of  life,  had  safely  flown 

And  nestled  in  the  bosom  of  the  king ; 

See,  'tis  a  small  weak  bird,  with  unfledged  wing. 

But  you  will  carry  it  for  me  secretly, 

And  bear  it  to  the  king,  then  come  to  me 

And  tell  me  it  is  safe,  and  I  shall  go 

Content,  knowing  that  he  I  love  my  love  doth  know. 

Then  she  wept  silently,  but  each  large  tear 

Made  pleading  music  to  the  inward  ear 

Of  good  Minuccio.    "  Lisa,  trust  in  me," 

He  said,  and  kissed  her  fingers  loyally; 

"  It  is  sweet  law  to  me  to  do  your  will. 

And  ere  the  sun  his  round  shall  thrice  fulfil, 

I  hope  to  bring  you  news  of  such  rare  skill 

As  amulets  have,  that  aches  in  trusting  bosoms  stilL" 

He  needed  not  to  pause  and  first  devise 

How  he  should  tell  the  king  ;  for  in  nowise 

Were  such  love-message  worthily  bested 

Save  in  fine  verse  by  music  rendered. 

He  sought  a  poet-friend,  a  Siennese, 

And    Mico,  mine,"  he  said,  "  full  oft  to  please 

Thy  whim  of  sadness  I  have  sung  thee  strains 

To  make  thee  weep  in  verse  :  now  pay  my  pains, 

And  write  me  a  canzon,  divinely  sad, 

Sinlessly  passionate  and  meekly  mad 

With  young  despair,  speaking  a  maiden's  heart 

Of  fifteen  summers,  who  would  fain  depart 

From  ripening  life's  new-urgent  mystery — 

Love-choice  of  one  too  high  her  love  to  be — 

But  cannot  yield  her  breath  till  she  has  poured 

Her  strength  away  in  this  hot-bleeding  word. 

Telling  the  secret  of  her  soul  to  her  soul's  lord." 

Said  Mico, "  Nay,  that  thought  is  poesy, 

I  need  but  listen  as  it  sings  to  me. 

Come  thou  again  to-morrow."    The  third  day, 


HO  W  LISA  LO  VED  THE  KING, 


When  linked  notes  had  perfected  the  lay, 

Minuccio  had  his  summons  to  the  court, 

To  make,  as  he  was  wont,  the  moments  short 

Of  ceremonious  dinner  to  the  king. 

This  was  the  time  when  he  had  meant  to  bring 

Melodious  message  of  young  Lisa's  love : 

He  waited  till  the  air  had  ceased  to  move 

To  ringing  silver,  till  Falernian  wine 

Made  quickened  sense  with  quietude  combine, 

And  then  with  passionate  descant  made  each  ear  incline. 

Love,  thou  didst  see  me,  light  as  morning's  breathy 
Roaming  a  garden  in  a  joyous  error, 
Laughing  at  chases  vain^  a  happy  child , 
Till  of  thy  countenance  the  alluring  terror 
In  majesty  from  out  the  blossoms  smiled^ 
From  out  their  life  seeming  a  beauteous  Death, 

*   0  Love,  who  so  didst  choose  me  for  thine  own. 
Taking  this  little  isle  to  thy  great  sway^ 
See  noWy  it  is  the  honor  of  thy  throne 
That  what  thou  gave st  perish  not  away y 
Nor  leave  some  sweet  remembrance  to  atone 
By  life  that  will  be  for  the  brief  life  gone: 
Hear,  ere  the  shroud  der  these  frail  limbs  be  thrown^ 
Since  every  king  is  vassal  unto  thecy 
My  heart's  lord  needs  must  listen  loyally — 
Ohy  tell  him  I  am  waiting  for  my  Death  ! 

Tell  him,  for  that  he  hath  such  royal  power 

'  Twere  hard  for  him  to  think  how  small  a  things 

How  slight  a  sign,  would  make  a  wealthy  dower 

For  one  like  me,  the  bride  of  that  pale  king 

Whose  bed  is  mine  at  some  swift-  nearing  hour. 

Go  to  my  lord^  and  to  his  memory  bring 

That  happy  birthday  of  my  sorrowing. 

When  his  large  glance  made  meaner  gazers  glad. 

Entering  the  bannered  lists :  'twas  then  I  had 

The  wound  that  laid  me  in  the  arms  of  Death. 

Tell  him y  0  Love,  I  am  a  lowly  maid^ 
No  more  than  any  little  knot  of  thyme 


HOW  LISA  LOVED  THE  KING. 


That  he  with  careless  foot  may  often  tread; 
Yet  lowest  fragrance  oft  will  mount  sublime 
And  cleave  to  things  most  high  and  hallowed^ 
As  doth  the  fragrance  of  my  life's  springtime; 
My  lowly  love,  that  soaring  seeks  to  climb 
Within  his  thought,  and  make  a  gentle  blisSy 
More  blissful  than  if  mine,  in  being  his: 
So  shall  I  live  in  him  and  rest  in  Death. 

The  strain  was  new.    It  seemed  a  pleading  cry, 

And  yet  a  rounded  perfect  melody, 

Making  grief  beauteous  as  the  tear-filled  eyes 

Of  little  child  at  little  miseries. 

Trembling  at  first,  then  swelling  as  it  rose, 

Like  rising  light  that  broad  and  broader  grows, 

It  filled  the  hall,  and  so  possessed  the  air 

That  not  one  breathing  soul  was  present  there, 

Though  dullest,  slowest,  but  was  quivering 

In  music's  grasp,  and  forced  to  hear  her  sing. 

But  most  such  sweet  compulsion  took  the  mood 

Of  Pedro  (tired  of  doing  what  he  would). 

Whether  the  words  which  that  strange  meaning  bore 

Were  but  the  poet's  feigning  or  aught  more. 

Was  bounden  question,  since  their  aim  must  be 

At  some  imagined  or  true  royalty. 

He  called  Minuccio,  and  bade  him  tell 

What  poet  of  the  day  had  writ  so  well ; 

For  though  they  came  behind  all  former  rhymes, 

The  verses  were  not  bad  for  these  poor  times. 

**Monsignor,  they  are  only  three  days  old," 

Minuccio  said;  ^'but  it  must  not  be  told 

How  this  song  grew,  save  to  your  royal  ear." 

Eager,  the  king  withdrew  where  none  was  near. 

And  gave  close  audience  to  Minuccio, 

Who  meetly  told  that  love-tale  meet  to  know. 

The  king  had  features  pliant  to  confess 

The  presence  of  a  manly  tenderness — 

Son,  father,  brother,  lover,  blent  in  one, 

In  fine  harmonic  exaltation — 

The  spirit  of  religious  chivalry. 

He  listened,  and  Minuccio  could  see 

The  tender,  generous  admiration  spread   


HOW  LISA  LOVED  THE  KING. 


O'er  all  his  face,  and  glorify  his  head 
With  royalty  that  would  have  kept  its  rank 
Though  his  brocaded  robes  to  tatters  shrank. 
He  answered  without  pause,  "  So  sweet  a  maid, 
In  nature's  own  insignia  arrayed. 
Though  she  were  come  of  unmixed  trading  blood 
That  sold  and  bartered  ever  since  the  Flood, 
Would  have  the  self-contained  and  single  worth 
Of  radiant  jewels  born  in  darksome  earth. 
Raona  were  a  shame  to  Sicily, 
Letting  such  love  and  tears  unhonored  be : 
Hasten,  Minuccio,  tell  her  that  the  king 
To-day  will  surely  visit  her  when  vespers  ring." 

Joyful,  Minuccio  bore  the  joyous  word. 

And  told  at  full,  while  none  but  Lisa  heard, 

How  each  thing  had  befallen,  sang  the  song 

And  like  a  patient  nurse  who  would  prolong 

All  means  of  soothing,  dwelt  upon  each  tone, 

Each  look,  with  which  the  mighty  Aragon 

Marked  the  high  worth  his  royal  heart  assigned 

To  that  dear  place  he  held  in  Lisa's  mind. 

She  listened  till  the  draughts  of  pure  content 

Through  all  her  limbs  like  some  new  being  went — 

Life,  not  recovered,  but  untried  before. 

From  out  the  growing  world's  unmeasured  store 

Of  fuller,  better,  more  divinely  mixed, 

'Twas  glad  reverse :  she  had  so  firmly  fixed 

To  die,  already  seemed  to  fall  a  veil 

Shrouding  the  inner  glow  from  light  of  senses  pale. 

Her  parents  wondering  see  her  half  arise — 

Wondering,  rejoicing,  see  her  long,  dark  eyes 

Brimful  with  clearness,  not  of  'scaping  tears, 

But  of  some  hght  ethereal  that  enspheres 

Their  orbs  with  calm,  some  vision  newly  learnt 

Where  strangest  fires  erewhile  had  blindly  burnt. 

She  asked  to  have  her  soft,  white  robe  and  band, 

And  coral  ornaments,  and  with  her  hand 

She  gave  her  locks'  dark  length  a  backward  fall, 

Then  looked  intently  in  a  mirror  small, 

And  feared  her  face  might  perhaps  displease  the  king; 


3^1 


HO  W  LISA  LO  VED  THE  KING. 


"  In  truth,"  she  said,  "  I  am  a  tiny  thing ; 

I  was  too  bold  to  tell  what  could  such  visit  bring." 

Meanwhile  the  king,  revolving  in  his  thought 

That  virgin  passion,  was  more  deeply  wrought 

To  chivalrous  pity  ;  and  at  vesper  bell, 

With  careless  mien,  which  hid  his  purpose  well, 

Went  forth  on  horseback,  and  as  if  by  chance 

Passing  Bernardo's  house,  he  paused  to  glance 

At  the  fine  garden  of  this  wealthy  man, 

This  Tuscan  trader  turned  Palermitan  : 

But,  presently  dismounting,  chose  to  walk 

Amid  the  trellises,  in  gracious  talk 

With  this  same  trader,  deigning  even  to  ask 

If  he  had  yet  fulfilled  the  father's  task 

Of  marrying  that  daughter,  whose  young  charms 

Himself,  betwixt  the  passages  of  arms, 

Noted  admiringly.    "  Monsignor,  no. 

She  is  not  married ;  that  were  little  woe, 

Since  she  has  counted  barely  fifteen  years ; 

But  all  such  hopes  of  late  have  turned  to  fears  ; 

She  droops  and  fades ;  though  for  a  space  quite  brief — 

Scarce  three  hours  past — she  finds  some  strange  rehef." 

The  king  advised :  "  'Twere  dole  to  all  of  us, 

The  world  should  lose  a  maid  so  beauteous ; 

Let  me  now  see  her;  since  I  am  her  liege  lord, 

Her  spirits  must  wage  war  with  death  at  my  strong  word." 

In  such  half-serious  playfulness,  he  wends. 

With  Lisa's  father  and  two  chosen  friends. 

Up  to  the  chamber  where  she  pillowed  sits 

Watching  the  open  door,  that  now  admits. 

A  presence  as  much  better  than  her  dreams, 

As  happiness  than  any  longing  seems. 

The  king  advanced,  and,  with  a  reverent  kiss 

Upon  her  hand,  said,  "  Lady,  what  is  this  ? 

You,  whose  sweet  youth  should  others'  solace  be. 

Pierce  all  our  hearts,  languishing  piteously. 

We  pray  you,  for  the  love  of  us,  be  cheered. 

Nor  be  too  reckless  of  that  life,  endeared 

To  us  who  know  your  passing  worthiness. 

And  count  your  blooming  life  as  part  of  our  life's  bliss." 

Those  words,  that  touch  upon  her  hand  from  him 

Whom  her  soul  worshipped,  as  far  seraphim 


HOW  LISA  LOVED  THE  KING. 


Worship  the  distant  glory,  brought  some  shame 
Quivering  upon  her  cheek,  yet  thrilled  her  frame 
With  such  deep  joy  she  seemed  in  paradise. 
In  wondering  gladness,  and  in  dumb  surprise 
That  bliss  could  be  so  blissful :  then  she  spoke — 

Signor,  I  was  too  weak  to  bear  the  yoke. 
The  golden  yoke  of  thoughts  too  great  for  me. 
That  was  the  ground  of  my  infirmity. 
But  now,  I  pray  your  grace  to  have  belief 
That  I  shall  soon  be  well,  nor  any  more  cause  grief/ 

The  king  alone  perceived  the  covert  sense 
Of  all  her  words,  which  made  one  evidence 
With  her  pure  voice  and  candid  loveliness 
That  he  had  lost  much  honor,  honoring  less 
That  message  of  her  passionate  distress. 
He  stayed  beside  her  for  a  little  while 
With  gentle  looks  and  speech,  until  a  smile 
As  placid  as  a  ray  of  early  morn 
On  opening  flower-cups  o'er  her  lips  was  borne. 
When  he  had  left  her,  and  the  tidings  spread^ 
Through  all  the  town  how  he  had  visited 
The  Tuscan  trader's  daughter,  who  was  sick, 
Men  said,  it  was  a  royal  deed  and  ca'tholic. 

And  Lisa  ?  she  no  longer  wished  for  death ; 

But  as  a  poet,  who  sweet  verses  saith 

Within  his  soul,  and  joys  in  music  there, 

Nor  seeks  another  heaven,  nor  can  bear 

Disturbing  pleasures,  so  was  she  content, 

Breathing  the  life  of  grateful  sentiment. 

She  thought  no  maid  betrothed  could  be  more  blest 

For  treasure  must  be  valued  by  the  test 

Of  highest  excellence  and  rarity. 

And  her  dear  joy  was  best  as  best  could  be  ; 

There  seemed  no  other  crown  to  her  delight 

Now  the  high  loved  one  saw  her  love  aright. 

Thus  her  soul,  thriving  on  that  exquisite  mood. 

Spread  like  the  May-time  all  its  beauteous  good 

O'er  the  soft  bloom  of  neck,  and  arms,  and  cheek. 

And  strengthened  the  sweet  body,  once  so  weak, 

Until  she  rose  and  walked,  and,  like  a  bird 


3o6 


HOW  LISA  LOVED  THE  KING. 


With  sweetly  rippling  throat,  she  made  her  spring  joys 
heard. 

The  king,  when  he  the  happy  change  had  seen, 

Trusted  the  ear  of  Constance,  his  fair  queen, 

With  Lisa's  innocent  secret,  and  conferred 

How  they  should  jointly,  by  their  deed  and  word, 

Honor  this  maiden's  love,  which,  like  the  prayer 

Of  loyal  hermits,  never  thought  to  share 

In  what  it  gave.    The  queen  had  that  chief  grace 

Of  womannood,  a  heart  that  can  embrace 

All  goodness  in  another  woman's  form ; 

And  that  same  day,  ere  the  sun  lay  too  warm, 

On  southern  terraces,  a  messenger 

Informed  Bernardo  that  the  royal  pair 

Would  straightway  visit  him  and  celebrate 

Their  gladness  at  his  daughter's  happier  state. 

Which  they  were  fain  to  see.    Soon  came  the  king 

On  horseback,  with  his  barons,  heralding 

The  advent  of  the  queen  in  courtly  state ; 

And  all,  descending  at  the  garden  gate. 

Streamed  with  their  feathers,  velvet,  and  brocade, 

Through  the  bleached  alleys,  till  they,  pausing,  made 

A  lake  of  splendor  'mid  the  aloes  gray — 

When,  meekly  facing  all  their  proud  array. 

The  white-robed  Lisa  with  her  parents  stood. 

As  some  white  dove  before  the  gorgeous  brood 

Of  dapple- oreasted  birds  born  by  the  Colchian  flood. 

The  king  and  queen,  by  gracious  looks  and  speech, 

Encourage  her,  and  thus  their  courtiers  teach 

How  this  fair  morning  they  may  courtliest  be 

By  making  Lisa  pass  it  happily. 

And  soon  the  ladies  and  the  barons  all 

Draw  her  by  turns,  as  at  a  festival 

Made  for  her  sake,  to  easy,  gay  discourse. 

And  compliment  with  looks  and  smiles  enforce ; 

A  joyous  hum  is  heard  the  gardens  round ; 

Soon  there  is  Spanish  dancing,  and  the  sound 

Of  minstrel's  song,  and  autumn  fruits  are  pluckt ; 

Till  mindfully  the  king  and  queen  conduct 

Lisa  apart  to  where  a  trellised  shade 

Made  pleasant  resting.    Then  King  Pedro  said — 


HOW  LISA  LOVED  THE  KING. 


"  Excellent  maiden,  that  rich  gift  of  love 

Your  heart  hath  made  us,  hath  a  worth  above 

All  royal  treasures,  nor  is  fitly  met 

Save  when  the  grateful  memory  of  deep  debt 

Lies  still  behind  the  outward  honors  done 

And,  as  a  sign  that  no  oblivion 

Shall  overflood  that  faithful  memory, 

We  while  we  live  your  cavalier  will  be, 

Nor  will  we  ever  arm  ourselves  for  fight. 

Whether  for  struggle  dire  or  brief  delight 

Of  warlike  feigning,  but  we  first  will  take 

The  colors  you  ordain,  and  for  your  sake 

Charge  the  more  bravely  where  your  emblem  is ; 

Nor  will  we  ever  claim  an  added  bliss 

To  our  sweet  thoughts  of  you  save  one  sole  kiss. 

But  there  still  rests  the  outward  honor  meet 

To  mark  your  worthiness,  and  we  entreat 

That  you  will  turn  your  ear  to  proffered  vows 

Of  one  who  loves  you,  and  would  be  your  spouse, 

We  must  not  wrong  yourself  and  Sicily 

By  letting  all  your  blooming  years  pass  by 

Unmated :  you  will  give  the  world  its  due 

From  beauteous  maiden  and  become  a  matron  true.' 

Then  Lisa,  wrapt  in  virgin  wonderment 

At  her  ambitious  love's  complete  content. 

Which  left  no  further  good  for  her  to  seek 

Than  love's  obedience,  said  with  accent  meek — 

"  Monsignor,  I  know  well  that  were  it  known 

To  all  the  world  how  high  my  love  had  flown, 

There  would  be  few  who  would  not  deem  me  mad, 

Or  say  my  mind  the  falsest  image  had 

Of  my  condition  and  your  lofty  place. 

But  heaven  has  seen  that  for  no  moment's  space 

Have  I  forgotten  you  to  be  the  king, 

Or  me  myself  to  be  a  lowly  thing — 

A  little  lark,  enamoured  of  the  sky, 

That  soared  to  sing,  to  break  its  breast,  and  die. 

But,  as  you  better  know  than  I,  the  heart 

In  choosing  chooseth  not  its  own  desert, 

But  that  great  merit  which  attracteth  it; 

Tis  law,  I  struggled,  but  I  must  submit, 


HO py  LISA  LOVED  THE  KING, 


And  having  seen  a  worth  all  worth  above, 

I  loved  you,  love  you,  and  shall  always  love. 

But  that  doth  mean,  my  will  is  ever  yours, 

Not  only  when  your  will  my  good  insures, 

But  if  it  wrought  me  what  the  world  calls  harm — 

Fire,  wounds,  would  wear  from  your  dear  will  a  charm. 

That  you  will  be  my  knight  is  full  content, 

And  for  that  kiss — I  pray  first  for  the  queen's  consent. 

Her  answer,  given  with  such  firm  gentleness, 

Pleased  the  queen  well,  and  made  her  hold  no  less 

Of  Lisa's  merit  than  the  king  had  held. 

And  so,  all  cloudy  threats  of  grief  dispelled, 

There  was  betrothal  made  that  very  morn 

'Twixt  Perdicone,  youthful,  brave,  well-born. 

And  Lisa,  whom  he  loved ;  she  loving  well 

The  lot  that  from  obedience  befell. 

The  queen  a  rare  betrothal  ring  on  each 

Bestowed,  and  other  gems,  with  gracious  speech. 

And  that  no  joy  might  lack,  the  king,  who  knew 

The  youth  was  poor,  gave  him  rich  Ceffalu 

And  Cataletta,  large  and  fruitful  lands — 

Adding  much  promise  when  he  joined  their  hands. 

At  last  he  said  to  Lisa,  with  an  air 

Gallant  yet  noble:  "Now  we  claim  our  share 

From  your  sweet  love,  a  share  which  is  not  small; 

For  in  the  sacrament  one  crumb  is  all." 

Then  taking  her  small  face  his  hands  between. 

He  kissed  her  on  the  brow  with  kiss  serene, 

Fit  seal  to  that  pure  vision  her  young  soul  had  seen. 

Sicihans  witnessed  that  King  Pedro  kept 

His  royal  promise :  Perdicone  stept 

To  many  honors  honorably  won, 

Living  with  Lisa  in  true  union. 

Throughout  his  life  the  king  still  took  delight 

To  call  himself  fair  Lisa's  faithful  knight; 

And  never  wore  in  field  or  tournament 

A  scarf  or  emblem  save  by  Lisa  sent. 

Such  deeds  made  subjects  loyal  in  that  land: 
They  joyed  that  one  so  worthy  to  command, 
So  chivalrous  and  gentle,  had  become 


HOW  LISA  LOVED  THE  KING. 


The  king  of  Sicily,  and  filled  the  room 

Of  Frenchmen,  who  abused  the  Church's  trust, 

Till,  in  a  righteous  vengeance  on  their  lust, 

Messina  rose,  with  God,  and  with  the  dagger's  thrust. 

L' ENVOI. 

Reader,  this  story  pleased  me  long  ago 

In  the  bright  pages  of  Boccaccio, 

And  where  the  author  of  a  good  we  know. 

Let  us  not  fail  to  pay  the  grateful  thanks  we  owe 

1869 


A  MINOR  PROPHET. 


I  HAVE  a  friend,  a  vegetarian  seer, 

By  name  Elias  Baptist  Butterworth, 

A  harmless,  bland,  disinterested  man, 

Whose  ancestors  in  Cromwell's  day  believed 

The  Second  Advent  certain  in  five  years, 

But  when  King  Charles  the  Second  came  instead 

Revised  their  date  and  sought  another  world : 

I  mean — not  heaven,  but — America. 

A  fervid  stock,  whose  generous  hope  embraced 

The  fortunes  of  mankind,  not  "stopping  short 

At  rise  of  leather,  or  the  fall  of  gold, 

Nor  listening  to  the  voices  of  the  time 

As  housewives  listen  to  a  cackling  hen, 

With  wonder  whether  she  has  laid  her  egg 

On  their  own  nest-egg     Still  they  did  insist 

Somewhat  too  wearisomely  on  the  joys 

Of  their  Millennium,  when  coats  and  hats 

Would  all  be  of  one  pattern,  books  and  songs 

All  fit  for  Sundays,  and  the  casual  talk 

As  good  as  sermons  preached  extempore. 

And  in  Elias  the  ancestral  zeal 

Breathes  strong  as  ever,  only  modified 

By  Transatlantic  air  and  modern  thought. 

You  could  not  pass  him  in  the  street,  and  fail 

To  note  his  shoulders'  long  declivity. 

Beard  to  the  waist,  swan-neck,  and  large,  pale  eyes ; 

Or,  when  he  lifts  his  hat,  to  mark  his  hair 

Brushed  back  to  show  his  great  capacity — 

A  full  grain's  length  at  the  angle  of  the  brow 

Proving  him  witty,  while  the  shallower  men 

Only  seem  witty  in  their  repartees. 

Not  that  he's  vain,  but  that  his  doctrine  needs 

The  testimony  of  his  frontal  lobe. 


A  MINOR  PROPHET, 


On  all  points  he  adopts  the  latest  views; 

Takes  for  the  key  of  univeral  Mind 

The  "levitation"  of  stout  gentlemen  ; 

Believes  the  Rappings  are  not  spirits'  work, 

But  the  Thought-atmosphere's,  a  steam  of  brains 

In  correlated  force  of  raps,  as  proved 

By  motion,  heat,  and  science  generally; 

The  Spectrum,  for  example,  which  has  shown 

The  self-same  metals  in  the  sun  as  here; 

So  the  Thought-atmosphere  is  everywhere. 

High  truths  that  glimmered  under  other  names 

To  ancient  sages,  whence  good  scholarship 

Applied  to  Eleusinian  mysteries — 

The  Vedas — Tripitaka — Vendidad — 

Might  furnish  weaker  proof  for  weaker  minds 

That  Thought  was  rapping  in  the  hoary  past, 

And  might  have  edified  the  Greeks  by  raps 

At  the  greater  Dionysia,  if  their  ears 

Had  not  been  filled  with  Sophoclean  verse. 

And  when  all  Earth  is  vegetarian — 

When,  lacking  butchers,  quadrupeds  die  out, 

And  less  Thought-atmosphere  is  re-absorbed 

By  nerves  of  insects  parasitical, 

Those  higher  truths,  seized  now  by  higher  minds 

But  not  expressed  (the  insects  hindering), 

Will  either  flash  out  into  eloquence, 

Or,  better  still,  be  comprehensible 

By  rappings  simply,  without  need  of  roots. 

'Tis  on  this  theme — the  vegetarian  world — 

That  good  Elias  willingly  expands : 

He  loves  to  tell  in  mildly  nasal  tones, 

And  vowels  stretched  to  suit  the  widest  views, 

The  future  fortunes  of  our  infant  Earth — 

When  it  will  be  too  full  of  human  kind 

To  have  the  room  for  wilder  animals. 

Saith  he,  Sahara  will  be  populous 

With  families  of  gentlemen  retired 

From  commerce  in  more  Central  Africa, 

Who  order  coolness  as  we  order  coal. 

And  have  a  lobe  anterior  strong  enough 

To  think  away  the  sand-storms.    Science  thus 


A  MINOR  PROPHET. 


Will  leave  no  spot  on  this  terraqueous  globe 

Unfit  to  be  inhabited  by  man, 

The  chief  of  animals :  ail  meaner  brutes 

Will  have  been  smoked  and  elbowed  out  of  life. 

No  lions  then  shall  lap  Caffrarian  pools, 

Or  shake  the  Atlas  with  their  midnight  roar: 

Even  the  slow,  slime-loving  crocodile. 

The  last  of  animals  to  take  a  hint. 

Will  then  retire  forever  from  a  scene 

Where  public  feeling  strongly  sets  against  him. 

Fishes  may  lead  carnivorous  lives  obscure, 

But  must  not  dream  of  culinary  rank, 

Or  being  dished  in  good  society. 

Imagination  in  that  distant  age. 

Aiming  at  fiction  called  historical. 

Will  vainly  try  to  reconstruct  the  times 

When  it  was  men's  preposterous  delight 

To  sit  astride  live  horses,  which  consumed 

Materials  for  incalculable  cakes; 

When  there  were  milkmaids  who  drew  milk  from  cows 

With  udders  kept  abnormal  for  that  end. 

Since  the  rude  mythopceic  period 

Of  Aryan  dairymen,  who  did  not  blush 

To  call  their  milkmaid  and  their  daughter  one — 

Helplessly  gazing  at  the  Milky  Way, 

Nor  dreaming  of  the  astrial  cocoa-nuts 

Quite  at  the  service  of  posterity. 

'Tis  to  be  feared,  though,  that  the  duller  boys, 

Much  given  to  anachronisms  and  nuts, 

(Elias  has  confessed  boys  will  be  boys) 

May  write  a  jockey  for  a  centaur,  think 

Europa's  suitor  was  an  Irish  bull, 

iEsop  a  journalist  who  wrote  up  Fox, 

And  Bruin  a  chief  swindler  upon  'Change. 

Boys  will  be  boys,  but  dogs  will  all  be  moral, 

With  longer  alimentary  canals 

Suited  to  diet  vegetarian. 

The  uglier  breeds  will  fade  from  memory, 

Or,  being  palseontological. 

Live  but  as  portraits  in  large  learned  books. 

Distasteful  to  the  feelings  of  an  age 

Nourished  on  purest  beauty.    Earth  will  hold 


A  MINOR  PROPHET. 


313 


No  stupid  brutes,  no  cheerful  queernesses,  . 

No  naive  cunning,  grave  absurdity. 

Wart-pigs  with  tender  and  parental  grunts,  ' 

Wombats  much  flattened  as  to  their  contour, 

Perhaps  from  too  much  crushing  in  the  ark, 

But  taking  meekly  that  fatality ; 

The  serious  cranes,  unstung  by  ridicule; 

Long-headed,  short-legged,  solemn-looking  curs, 

(Wise,  silent  critics  of  a  flippant  age); 

The  silly  straddling  foals,  the  weak-brained  geese 

Hissing  fallaciously  at  sound  of  wheels — 

All  these  rude  products  will  have  disappeared 

Along  with  every  faulty  human  type. 

By  dint  of  diet  vegetarian 

All  will  be  harmony  of  hue  and  line, 

Bodies  and  minds  all  perfect,  limbs  well-turned, 

And  talk  quite  free  from  aught  erroneous. 

Thus  far  Elias  in  his  seer's  mantle : 

But  at  this  climax  in  his  prophecy 

My  sinking  spirits,  fearing  to  be  swamped, 

Urge  me  to  speak.    "  High  prospects  these,  my  friend 

Setting  the  weak  carnivorous  brain  astretch; 

We  will  resume  the  thread  another  day." 

To-morrow,"  cries  Elias,  "at  this  hour?" 
"No,  not  to-morrow — I  shall  have  a  cold — 

At  least  I  feel  some  soreness — this  endemic — 

Good  by." 

No  tears  are  sadder  than  the  smile 

With  which  I  quit  Elias.  Bitterly 

I  feel  that  every  change  upon  this  earth 

Is  bought  with  sacrifice.    My  yearnings  fail 

To  reach  that  high  apocalyptic  mount 

Which  shows  in  bird's-eye  view  a  perfect  world. 

Or  enter  warmly  into  other  joys 

Than  those  of  faulty,  struggling  human  kind. 

That  strain  upon  my  soul's  too  feeble  wing 

Ends  in  ignoble  floundering :  I  fall 

Into  short-sighted  pity  for  the  men 

Who,  Hving  in  those  perfect  future  times, 

Will  not  know  half  the  dear  imperfect  things 


314 


A  MINOR  PROPHET. 


That  move  my  smiles  and  tears — will  never  know 

The  fine  old  incongruities  that  raise 

My  friendly  laugh ;  the  innocent  conceits, 

That  like  a  needless  eyeglass  or  black  patch, 

Give  those  who  wear  them  harmless  happiness; 

The  twists  and  cracks  in  our  poor  earthenware, 

That  touch  me  to  more  conscious  fellowship 

(I  am  not  myself  the  finest  Parian) 

With  my  coevals.    So  poor  Colin  Clout, 

To  whom  raw  onion  gives  prospective  zest, 

Consoling  hours  of  dampest  wintry  work, 

Could  hardly  fancy  any  regal  joys 

Quite  unimpregnate  with  the  onion's  scent: 

Perhaps  his  highest  hopes  are  not  all  clear 

Of  waftings  from  that  energetic  bulb: 

'Tis  well  that  onion  is  not  heresy. 

Speaking  in  parable,  I  am  Colin  Clout. 

A  clinging  flavor  penetrates  my  life — 

My  onion  is  imperfectness:  I  cleave 

To  nature's  blunders,  evanescent  types 

Which  sages  banish  from  Utopia. 

"Not  worship  beauty?"  say  you.    Patience,  friend 

I  worship  in  the  temple  with  the  rest ; 

But  by  my  hearth  I  keep  a  sacred  nook 

For  gnomes  and  dwarfs,  duck-footed  waddling  elves 

Who  stitched  and  hammered  for  the  weary  man 

In  days  of  old.    And  in  that  piety 

I  clothe  ungainly  forms  inherited 

From  toiling  generations,  daily  bent 

At  desk,  or  plough,  or  loom,  or  in  the  mine, 

In  pioneering  labors  for  the  world. 

Nay,  I  am  apt  when  floundering  confused 

P>om  too  rash  flight,  to  grasp  at  paradox, 

And  pity  future  men  who  will  not  know 

A  keen  experience  with  pity  blent, 

The  pathos  exquisite  of  lovely  minds 

Hid  in  harsh  forms — not  penetrating  them 

Like  fire  divine  within  a  common  bush 

Which  glows  transfigured  by  the  heavenly  guest, 

So  that  men  put  their  shoes  off;  but  encaged 

Like  a  sweet  child  within  some  thick-walled  cell. 

Who  leaps  and  fails  to  hold  the  window-bars, 


A  MINOR  PROPHET, 


But  having  shown  a  little  dimpled  hand 
Is  visited  thenceforth  by  tender  hearts 
Whose  eyes  keep  watch  about  the  prison  walls. 
A  foolish,  nay,  a  wicked  paradox ! 
For  purest  pity  is  the  eye  of  love 
Melting  at  sight  of  sorrow;  and  to  grieve 
Because  it  sees  no  sorrow,  shows  a  love 
Warped  from  its  truer  nature,  turned  to  love 
Of  merest  habit,  like  the  miser's  greed. 
But  I  am  Colin  still :  my  prejudice 
Is  for  the  flavor  of  my  daily  food. 
Not  that  I  doubt  the  world  is  growing  still 
As  once  it  grew  from  Chaos  and  from  Night; 
Or  have  a  soul  too  shrunken  for  the  hope 
Which  dawned  in  human  breasts,  a  double  morn, 
With  earliest  watchings  of  the  rising  light 
Chasing  the  darkness ;  and  through  many  an  age 
Has  raised  the  vision  of  a  future  time 
That  stands  an  Angel  with  a  face  all  mild 
Spearing  the  demon.    I,  too,  rest  in  faith 
That  man's  perfection  is  the  crowning  flower, 
Toward  which  the  urgent  sap  in  life's  great  tree 
Is  pressing, — seen  in  puny  blossoms  now. 
But  in  the  world's  great  morrows  to  expand 
With  broadest  petal  and  with  deepest  glow. 

Yet,  see  the  patched  and  plodding  citizen 
Waiting  upon  the  pavement  with  the  throng 
While  some  victorious  world  hero  makes 
Triumphal  entry,  and  the  peal  of  shouts 
And  flash  of  faces  'neath  uplifted  hats 
Run  like  a  storm  of  joy  along  the  streets! 
He  says,  "God  bless  him!"  almost  with  a  sob, 
As  the  great  hero  passes  ;  he  is  glad 
The  world  holds  mighty  men  and  mighty  deeds 
The  music  stirs  his  pulses  like  strong  wine, 
The  moving  splendor  touches  him  with  awe — 
'Tis  glory  shed  around  the  common  weal, 
And  he  will  pay  his  tribute  willingly, 
Though  with  the  pennies  earned  by  sordid  toil. 
Perhaps  the  hero's  deeds  have  helped  to  bring 
A  time  when  every  honest  citizen 


A  MINOR  PROPHET. 


Shall  wear  a  coat  unpatched.    And  yet  he  feels 

More  easy  fellowship  with  neighbors  there 

Who  look  on  too ;  and  he  will  soon  relapse 

From  noticing  the  banners  and  the  steeds 

To  think  with  pleasure  there  is  just  one  bun 

Left  in  his  pocket,  that  may  serve  to  tempt 

The  wide-eyed  lad,  whose  weight  is  all  too  much 

For  that  young  mother's  arms :  and  then  he  falls 

To  dreamy  picturing  of  sunny  days 

When  he  himself  was  a  small,  big-cheeked  lad 

In  some  far  village  where  no  heroes  came, 

And  stood  a  listener  'twixt  his  father's  legs 

In  the  warm  fire-light,  while  the  old  folk  talked 

And  shook  their  heads  and  looked  upon  the  floor; 

And  he  was  puzzled,  thinking  life  was  fine — - 

The  bread  and  cheese  so  nice  all  through  the  year, 

And  Christmas  sure  to  come.    Oh,  that  good  time  I 

He,  could  he  choose,  would  have  those  days  again, 

And  see  the  dear  old-fashioned  things  once  more. 

But  soon  the  wheels  and  drums  have  all  passed  by, 

And  tramping  feet  are  heard  like  sudden  rain. 

The  quiet  startles  our  good  citizen ; 

He  feels  the  child  upon  his  arms,  and  knows 

He  is  with  the  people  making  holiday 

Because  of  hopes  for  better  days  to  come. 

But  Hope  to  him  was  like  the  brilliant  west 

Telling  of  sunrise  in  a  world  unknown. 

And  from  that  dazzling  curtain  of  bright  hues 

He  turned  to  the  familiar  face  of  fields 

Lying  all  clear  in  the  calm  morning  land. 

Maybe  'tis  wiser  not  to  fix  a  lens 

Too  scrutinizing  on  the  glorious  times 

When  Barbarossa  shall  arise  and  shake 

His  mountain,  good  King  Arthur  come  again, 

And  all  the  heroes  of  such  giant  soul 

That,  living  once  to  cheer  mankind  with  hope, 

They  had  to  sleep  until  the  time  was  ripe 

For  greater  deeds  to  match  their  greater  thought, 

Yet  no !  the  earth  yields  nothing  more  Divine 

Than  high  prophetic  vision — than  the  Seer 

Who,  fasting  from  man's  meaner  joy,  beholds 

The  paths  of  beauteous  order,  and  constructs 


A  MINOR  PROPHET. 


A  fairer  type,  to  shame  our  low  content. 
But  prophecy  is  like  potential  sound 
Which  turned  to  music  seems  a  voice  sublime 
From  out  the  soul  of  light ;  but  turns  to  noise 
In  scrannel  pipes,  and  makes  all  ears  averse. 

The  faith  that  life  on  earth  is  being  shaped 

To  glorious  ends,  that  order,  justice,  love 

Mean  man's  completeness,  mean  effect  as  sure 

As  roundness  in  the  dew-drop — ^that  great  faith 

Is  but  the  rushing  and  expanding  stream 

Of  thought,  of  feeling,  fed  by  all  the  past. 

Our  finest  hope  is  finest  memory. 

As  they  who  love  in  age  think  youth  is  blest 

Because  it  has  a  life  to  fill  with  love. 

Full  souls  are  double  mirrors,  making  still 

An  endless  vista  of  fair  things  before 

Repeating  things  behind :  so  faith  is  strong 

Only -when  we  are  strong,  shrmks  when  we  shrink. 

It  comes  when  music  stirs  us,  and  the  chords 

Moving  on  some  grand  climax  shake  our  souls 

With  influx  new  that  makes  new  energies. 

It  comes  in  swellings  of  the  heart  and  tears 

That  rise  at  noble  and  at  gentle  deeds — • 

At  labors  of  the  master-artist's  hand 

Which,  trembling,  touches  to  a  finer  end, 

Trembling  before  an  image  seen  within. 

It  comes  in  moments  of  heroic  love. 

Unjealous  joy  in  joy  not  made  for  us — 

In  conscious  triumph  of  the  good  within 

Making  us  worship  goodness  that  rebukes. 

Even  our  failures  are  a  prophecy. 

Even  our  yearnings  and  our  bitter  tears 

After  that  fair  and  true  we  cannot  grasp ; 

As  patriots  who  seem  to  die  in  vain 

Make  liberty  more  sacred  by  their  pangs. 

Presentiment  of  bitter  things  on  earth 

Sweeps  in  with  every  force  that  stirs  our  souls 

To  admiration,  self-renouncing  love, 

Or  thoughts,  like  light,  that  bind  the  world  in  one  : 

Sweeps  like  the  sense  of  vastness,  when  at  night 


318 


A  MINOR  PROPHET. 


We  hear  the  roll  and  dash  of  waves  that  break 
Nearer  and  nearer  with  the  rushing  tide, 
Which  rises  to  the  level  of  the  clifif 
Because  the  wide  Atlantic  rolls  behind 
Throbbing  respondent  to  the  far-off  orbs. 


1865. 


BROTHER  AND  SISTER. 


I. 

I  CANNOT  choose  but  think  upon  the  time 
When  our  two  lives  grew  like  two  buds  that  kiss 
At  lightest  thrill  from  the  bee's  swinging  chime, 
Because  the  one  so  near  the  other  is. 

He  was  the  elder,  and  a  little  man 
Of  forty  inches,  bound  to  show  no  dread, 
And  I  the  girl  that  puppy-like  now  ran, 
Now  lagged  behind  my  brother's  larger  tread. 

I  held  him  wise,  and  when  he  talked  to  me 
Of  snakes  and  birds,  and  which  God  loved  the  best, 
I  thought  his  knowledge  marked  the  boundary 
Where  men  grew  blind,  though  angels  knew  the  rest 

If  he  said  "  Hush ! "  I  tried  to  hold  my  breath, 
Wherever  he  said  "Cornel"  I  stepped  in  faith. 

II. 

Long  years  have  left  their  writing  on  my  brow. 
But  yet  the  freshness  and  the  dew-fed  beam 
Of  those  young  mornings  are  about  me  now, 
When  we  two  wandered  toward  the  far-off  stream 

With  rod  and  line.    Our  basket  held  a  store 
Baked  for  us  only,  and  I  thought  with  joy 
That  I  should  have  my  share,  though  he  had  more 
Because  he  Wcis  the  elder  and  a  boy. 

The  firmaments  of  daisies  since  to  me 
Have  had  those  mornings  in  their  opening  eyes 
The  bunched  cowslip's  pale  transparency 
Carries  that  sunshine  of  sweet  memories. 


320 


BROTHER  AND  SISTER. 


And  wild-rose  branches  take  their  finest  scent 
From  those  blest  hours  of  infantine  content. 

i?u 

Our  mother  bade  us  keep  the  trodden  ways, 
Stroked  down  my  tippet,  set  my  brother's  frill. 
Then  with  the  benediction  of  her  gaze 
Clung  to  us  lessening,  and  pursued  us  still 

Across  the  homestead  to  the  rookery  elms, 
Whose  tall  old  trunks  had  each  a  grassy  mound; 
So  rich  for  us,  we  counted  them  as  realms 
With  varied  products :  here  were  earth-nuts  found, 

And  here  the  Lady-fingers  in  deep  shade; 
Here  sloping  towards  the  Moat  the  rushes  grew, 
The  large  to  split  for  pith,  the  small  to  braid; 
While  over  all  the  dark  rooks  cawing  flew. 

And  made  a  happy  strange  solemnity, 

A  deep-toned  chant  from  life  unknown  to  me. 

IV. 

Our  meadow-path  had  memorable  spots : 
One  where  it  bridged  a  tiny  rivulet. 
Deep  hid  by  tangled  blue  Forget-me-nots; 
And  all  along  the  waving  grasses  met 
• 

My  little  palm,  or  nodded  to  my  cheek. 
When  flowers  with  upturned  faces  gazing  drew 
My  wonder  downward,  seeming  all  to  speak 
With  eyes  of  souls  that  dumbly  heard  and  knew. 

Then  came  the  copse,  where  wild  things  rushed  unseen, 
And  black-scathed  grass  betrayed  the  past  abode 
Of  mystic  gypsies,  who  still  lurked  between 
Me  and  each  hidden  distance  of  the  road. 

A  gypsy  once  had  startled  me  at  play. 
Blotting  with  her  dark  smile  my  sunny  day. 


BROTHER  AND  SISTER. 


V. 

Thus  rambling  we  were  schooled  in  deepest  lore, 
And  learned  the  meanings  that  give  words  a  soul, 
The  fear,  the  love,  the  primal  passionate  store. 
Whose  shaping  impulses  make  manhood  whole. 

Those  hours  were  seed  to  all  my  after  good ; 
My  infant  gladness,  through  eye,  ear,  and  touch, 
Took  easily  as  warmth  a  various  food 
To  nourish  the  sweet  skill  of  loving  much. 

For  who  in  age  shall  roam  the  earth  and  find 
Reasons  for  loving  that  will  strike  out  love 
With  sudden  rod  from  the  hard  year-pressed  mind  ? 
Werj^  reasons  sown  as  thick  as  stars  above, 

'Tis  love  must  see  them,  as  the  eyes  see  light : 
Day  is  but  Number  to  the  darkened  sight. 

VI. 

Our  brown  canal  was  endless  to  my  thought; 
And  on  its  banks  I  sat  in  dreamy  peace, 
Unknowing  how  the  good  I  loved  was  wrought, 
Untroubled  by  the  fear  that  it  would  cease. 

Slowly  the  barges  floated  into  view 
Rounding  a  grassy  hill  to  me  sublime 
With  some  Unknown  beyond  it,  whither  flew 
Ihe  parting  cuckoo  toward  a  fresh  spring  time. 

The  wide-arched  bridge,  the  scented  elder-flowers, 
The  wondrous  watery  rings  that  died  too  soon. 
The  echoes  of  the  quarry,  the  still  hours 
With  white  robe  sweeping  on  the  shadeless  noon, 

Were  but  my  growing  self,  are  part  of  me, 
My  present  Past,  my  root  of  piety. 

yii. 

Those  long  days  measured  by  my  little  feet 
Had  chronicles  which  yield  me  many  a  text; 
Poems. — 11 


352  BROTHER  AND  SISTER. 

When  irony  still  finds  an  image  meet 

Of  full-grown  judgments  in  this  world  perplexed. 

One  day  my  brother  left  me  in  high  charge, 
To  mind  the  rod,  while  he  went  seeking  bait, 
And  bade  me,  when  I  saw  a  nearing  barge. 
Snatch  out  the  line,  lest  he  should  come  too  late. 

Proud  of  the  task,  I  watched  with  all  my  might 
For  one  whole  minute,  till  my  eyes  grew  wide, 
Till  sky  and  earth  took  on  a  strange,  new  light 
And  seemed  a  dream-world  floating  on  some  tide— 

A  fair  pavilioned  boat  for  me  alone 

Bearing  me  onward  through  the  vast  unknown. 

VIII. 

But  sudden  came  the  barge's  pitch-black  prow, 
Nearer  and  angrier  came  my  brother's  cry. 
And  all  my  soul  was  quivering  fear,  when  lo  I 
Upon  the  imperilled  line,  suspended  high, 

A  silver  perch !    My  guilt  that  won  the  prey, 
Now  turned  to  merit,  had  a  guerdon  rich 
Of  hugs  and  praises,  and  made  merry  play. 
Until  my  triumph  reached  it  highest  pitch. 

When  all  at  home  were  told  the  wondrous  feat, 
And  how  the  little  sister  had  fished  well. 
In  secret,  though  my  fortune  tasted  sweet, 
I  wondered  why  this  happiness  befell. 

The  little  lass  had  luck,"  the  gardener  said : 
And  so  I  learned,  luck  was  with  glory  wed, 

IX. 

We  had  the  self-same  world  enlarged  for  each 
By  loving  difference  of  girl  and  boy : 
The  fruit  that  hung  on  high  beyond  my  reach 
He  plucked  for  me,  and  oft  he  must  employ 


BROTHER  AND  SISTER, 


A  measuring  glance  to  guide  my  tiny  shoe 
Where  lay  firm  stepping-stones,  or  call  to  mind 
"This  thing  I  like  my  sister  may  not  do, 
For  she  is  little,  and  I  must  be  kind." 

'  Thus  boyish  Will  the  nobler  mastery  learned 
Where  inward  vision  over  impulse  reigns, 
Widening  its  life  with  separate  life  discerned, 
A  Like  unlike,  a  Self  that  self  restrains. 

His  years  with  others  must  the  sweeter  be 
For  those  brief  days  he  spent  in  loving  me. 

X. 

His  sorrow  was  my  sorrow,  and  his  joy 
Sent  little  leaps  and  laughs  through  all  my  frame ; 
My  doll  seemed  lifeless,  and  no  girlish  toy 
Had  any  reason  when  my  brother  came. 

I  knelt  with  him  at  marbles,  marked  his  fling, 
Cut  the  ringed  stem  and  make  the  apple  drop, 
Or  watched  him  winding  close  the  spinal  string 
That  looped  the  orbits  of  the  humming  top. 

Grasped  by  such  fellowship,  my  vagrant  thought 
Ceased  with  dream-fruit  dream-wishes  to  fulfil ; 
My  aery-picturing  fantasy  was  taught 
Subjection  to  the  harder,  truer  skill. 

That  seeks  with  deed  to  grave  a  thought-tracked  line 
And  by  "What  is,"  "What  will  be  "  to  define. 

XI. 

School  parted  us ;  we  never  found  again 
That  childish  world  where  our  two  spirits  mingled 
Like  scents  from  varying  roses  that  remain 
One  sweetness,  nor  can  evermore  be  singled. 

Yet  the  twin  habit  of  that  early  time 
Lingered  for  long  about  the  heart  and  tongue ; 
We  had  been  natives  of  one  happy  clime. 
And  its  dear  accent  to  our  utterance  clung. 


3^4 


BROTHER  AND  SISTER, 


Till  the  dire  years  whose  awful  name  is  Change 
Had  grasped  our  souls  still  yearning  in  divorce, 
And  pitiless  shaped  them  in  two  forms  that  range 
Two  elements  which  sever  their  life's  course. 

But  were  another  childhood-world  my  share, 
I  would  be  born  a  Httle  sister  there. 


\ 


STRADIVARIUS. 


Your  soul  was  lifted  by  the  wings  to-day 

Hearing  the  master  of  the  violin : 

You  praised  him,  praised  the  great  Sebastian,  too, 

Who  made  that  fine  Chaconne ;  but  did  you  think 

Of  old  Antonio  Stradivari  ? — him 

Who  a  good  century  and  a  half  ago 

Put  his  true  work  in  that  brown  instrument, 

And  by  the  nice  adjustment  of  its  frame 

Gave  it  responsive  life,  continuous 

With  the  master's  finger-tips  and  perfected 

Like  them  by  delicate  rectitude  of  use. 

Not  Bach  alone,  helped  by  fine  precedent 

Of  genius  gone  before,  nor  Joachim, 

Who  holds  the  strain  afresh  incorporate 

By  inward  hearing  and  notation  strict 

Of  nerve  and  muscle,  made  our  joy  to-day. 

Another  soul  was  living  in  the  air 

And  swaying  it  to  true  deliverance 

Of  high  invention  and  responsive  skill : — 

That  plain,  white-aproned  man  who  stood  at  work 

Patient  and  accurate,  full  fourscore  years, 

Cherished  his  sight  and  touch  by  temperance, 

And  since  keen  sense  is  love  of  perfectness 

Made  perfect  violins,  the  needed  paths 

For  inspiration  and  high  mastery. 

No  simpler  man  thati  he  :  he  never  cried, 
"  Why  was  I  born  to  this  monotonous  task 
Of  making  violins?"  or  flung  them  down 
To  suit  with  hurling  act  a  well-hurled  curse 
At  labor  on  such  perishable  stuff. 
Hence  neighbors  in  Cremona  held  him  duil, 
Called  him  a  slave,  a  mill-horse,  a  machine, 
Begged  him  to  tell  his  motives,  or  to  lend 
A  few  gold  pieces^to  a  loftier  mind. 


326  STRADIVARIUS. 

Yet  he  had  pithy  words  full  fed  by  fact ; 

For  Fact,  well-trusted,  reasons  and  persuades, 

Is  gnomic,  cutting,  or  ironical, 

Draws  tears,  or  is  a  tocsin  to  arouse — 

Can  hold  all  figures  of  the  orator 

In  one  plain  sentence;  has  her  pauses,  too — 

Eloquent  silence  at  the  chasm  abrupt 

Where  knowledge  ceases.    Thus  Antonio 

Made  answers  as  Fact  willed,  and  made  them  strong. 

Naldo,  a  painter  of  eclectic  school. 
Taking  his  dicers,  candle-light  and  grins 
From  Caravaggio,  and  in  holier  groups 
Combining  Flemish  flesh  with  martyrdom 
Knowing  all  tricks  of  style  at  thirty-one, 
And  weary  of  them,  while  Antonio 
At  sixty-nine  wrought  placidly  his  best 
Making  the  violin  you  heard  to-day — 
Naldo  would  tease  him  oft  to  tell  his  aims. 

"  Perhaps  thou  hast  some  pleasant  vice  to  feed — 

The  love  of  louis  d'ors  in  heaps  of  four. 

Each  violin  a  heap — I've  nought  to  blame; 

My  vices  waste  such  heaps.    But  then,  why  work 

With  painful  nicety  ?    Since  fame  once  earned 

By  luck  or  merit — oftenest  by  luck — 

(Else  why  do  I  put  Bonifazio's  name 

To  work  that  'pinxit  Naldo'  vjo\x\d  not  sell?) 

Is  welcome  index  to  the  wealthy  mob 

Where  they  should  pay  their  gold,  and  where  they  pay 

There  they  find  merit — take  your  tow  for  flax, 

And  hold  the  flax  unlabelled  with  your  name, 

Too  coarse  for  suflerance.'* 

Antonio  then: 
"  I  like  the  gold — well,  yes — but  not  for  meals. 
And  as  my  stomach,  so  my  eye  and  hand. 
And  inward  sense  that  works  along  with  both, 
Have  hunger  that  can  never  feed  on  coin 
Who  draws  a  line  and  satisfies  his  soul. 
Making  it  crooked  where  it  should  be  straight  ? 
An  idiot  with  an  oyster-shell  may  draw 


STRADIVARIUS. 


His  lines  along  the  sand,  all  wavering, 

Fixing  no  point  or  pathway  to  a  point ; 

An  idiot  one  remove  may  choose  his  line. 

Straggle  and  be  content ;  but  God  be  praised, 

Antonio  Stradivari  has  an  eye 

That  winces  at  false  work  and  loves  the  true, 

With  hand  and  arm  that  play  upon  the  tool 

As  willingly  as  any  singing  bird 

Sets  him  to  sing  his  morning  roundelay, 

Because  he  likes  to  sing  and  likes  the  song. 

Then  Naldo :  "  'Tis  a  petty  kind  of  fame 
At  best,  that  comes  of  making  viohns; 
And  saves  no  masses,  either.    Thou  wilt  go 
To  purgatory  none  the  less." 

But  he : 

'Twere  purgatory  here  to  make  them  ill; 
And  for  my  fame — when  any  master  holds 
'Twixt  chin  and  hand  a  vioHn  of  mine, 
He  will  be  glad  that  Stradivari  lived, 
Made  violins,  and  made  them  of  the  best. 
The  masters  only  know  whose  work  is  good : 
They  will  choose  mine,  and  while  God  gives  them  skill 
I  give  them  instruments  to  play  upon, 
God  choosing  me  to  help  Him." 

"What!  were  God 
At  fault  for  violins,  thou  absent?  " 

"  Yes ; 

He  were  at  fault  for  Stradivari's  work." 

"  Why,  many  hold  Giuseppe's  violins 
As  good  as  thine." 

"  May  be :  they  are  different. 
His  quality  declines :  he  spoils  his  hand 
With  over-drinking.    But  were  his  the  best. 
He  could  not  work  for  two.    My  work  is  mine 
And,  heresy  or  not,  if  my  hand  slacked 
I  should  rob  God — since  He  is  fullest  good — 
Leaving  a  blank  instead  of  violins, 
I  say,  not  God  Himself  can  make  man's  best 
Without  best  men  to  help  Him.    I  am  one  best 
Here  in  Cremona,  using  sunlight  well 


STRADIVARIUS. 


To  fashion  finest  maple  till  it  serves 
More  cunningly  than  throats,  for  harmony. 
'Tis  rare  delight :  I  would  not  change  my  skill 
To  be  the  Emperor  with  bungling  hands, 
And  lose  my  work,  which  comes  as  natural 
As  self  at  waking." 

"  Thou  art  little  more 
Than  a  deft  potter's  wheel,  Antonio ; 
Turning  out  work  by  mere  necessity 
And  lack  of  varied  function.    Higher  arts 
Subsist  on  freedom — eccentricity — 
Uncounted  inspirations — influence 
That  comes  with  drinking,  gambling,  talk  turned  wild 
Then  moody  misery  and  lack  of  food — 
With  every  dithyrambic  fine  excess : 
These  make  at  last  a  storm  which  flashes  out 
In  lightning  revelations.    Steady  work 
Turns  genius  to  a  loom ;  the  soul  must  lie 
Like  grapes  beneath  the  sun  till  ripeness  comes 
And  mellow  vintage.    I  could  paint  you  now 
The  finest  Crucifixion;  yesternight 
Returning  home  I  saw  it  on  a  sky. 
Blue-black,  thick-starred.    I  want  two  louis  d'ors 
To  buy  the  canvas  and  the  costly  blues — 
Trust  me  a  fortnight." 

"Where  are  those  last  two 
I  lent  thee  for  thy  Judith  ? — her  thou  saw'st 
In  saffron  gown,  with  Holofernes'  head 
And  beauty  all  complete?" 

"She  is  but  sketched ; 
I  lack  the  proper  model — and  the  mood. 
A  great  idea  is  an  eagle's  egg, 
Craves  times  for  hatching ;  while  the  eagle  sits, 
Feed  her." 

"  If  thou  wilt  call  thy  pictures  eggs, 
I  call  the  hatching.  Work.    'Tis  God  gives  skill, 
But  not  without  men's  hands :    He  could  not  make 
Antonio  Stradivari's  violins 
Without  Antonio.    Get  thee  to  thy  easel.'* 


1873. 


A  COLLEGE  BREAKFAST-PARTY. 


Young  Hamlet,  not  the  hesitating  Dane, 

But  one  named  after  him,  who  lately  strove 

For  honors  at  our  English  Wittenburg, — 

BlonS,  metaphysical,  and  sensuous. 

Questioning  all  things  and  yet  half  convinced, 

Credulity  were  better ;  held  inert 

'Twixt  fascinations  of  all  opposites, 

And  half  suspecting  that  the  mightiest  soul 

(Perhaps  his  own  ?)  was  union  of  extremes, 

Having  no  choice  but  choice  of  everything: 

As,  drinking  deep  to-day  for  love  of  wine, 

To-morrow  half  a  Brahmin,  scorning  life 

As  mere  illusion,  yearning  for  that  True 

Which  has  no  qualities  ;  another  day 

Finding  the  fount  of  grace  in  sacraments. 

And  purest  reflex  of  the  light  divine 

In  gem-bossed  pyx  and  broidered  chasuble. 

Resolved  to  wear  no  stockings  and  to  fast 

With  arms  extended,  waiting  ecstasy ; 

But  getting  cramps  instead,  and  needing  change, 

A  would-be-pagan  next : — 

Young  Hamlet  sat 
A  guest  with  five  of  somewhat  riper  age 
At  breakfast  with  Horatio,  a  friend 
With  few  opinions,  but  of  faithful  heart, 
Quick  to  detect  the  fibrous  spreading  roots 
Of  character  that  feed  men's  theories, 
Yet  cloaking  weaknesses  with  charity. 
And  ready  in  all  service  save  rebuke. 

With  ebb  of  breakfast  and  the  cider-cup 
Came  high  debate  :  the  others  seated  there 
Were  Osric,  spinner  of  fine  sentences, 
A  deHcate  insect  creeping  over  Hfe, 
Feeding  on  molecules  of  floral  breath, 


330  A  COLLEGE  BREAKFAST-PARTY, 

And  weaving  gossamer  to  trap  the  sun; 
Laertes  ardent,  rash,  and  radical; 
Discursive  Rosencranz,  grave  Guildenstern, 
And  he  for  whom  the  social  meal  was  made, 
The  polished  priest,  a  tolerant  listener. 
Disposed  to  give  a  hearing  to  the  lost, 
And  breakfast  with  them  ere  they  went  below. 

From  alpine  metaphysic  glaciers  first 
The  talk  sprang  copious ;  the  themes  were  old, 
But  so  is  human  breath,  so  infant  eyes, 
'The  daily  nurslings  of  creative  light. 
Small  words  held  mighty  meanings :  Matter,  Force, 
Self,  Not-self,  Being,  Seeming,  Space  and  Time — 
Plebeian  toilers  on  the  dusty  road 
Of  daily  traffic,  turned  to  Genii 
And  cloudy  giants  darkening  sun  and  moon. 
Creation  was  reversed  in  human  talk : 
None  said,  **Let  Darkness  be,"  but  Darkness  was; 
And  in  it  weltered  with  Teutonic  ease, 
An  argumentative  Leviathan, 
Blowing  cascades  from  out  his  element. 
The  thunderous  Rosencranz,  till 

"Truce,  I  beg 

Said  Osric,  with  nice  accent.    "  I  abhor 

That  battling  of  the  ghosts,  that  strife  of  terms 

For  utmost  lack  of  color,  form,  and  breath. 

That  tasteless  squabbling  called  Philosophy : 

As  if  a  blue-winged  butterfly  afloat 

For  just  three  days  above  the  Italian  fields. 

Instead  of  sipping  at  the  heart  of  flowers. 

Poising  in  sunshine,  fluttering  towards  its  bride, 

Should  fast  and  speculate,  considering 

What  were  if  it  were  not  ?  or  what  now  is 

Instead  of  that  which  seems  to  be  itself? 

Its  deepest  wisdom  surely  were  to  be 

A  sipping,  marrying,  blue-winged  butterfly ; 

Since  utmost  speculation  on  itself 

Were  but  a  three  days  living  of  worse  sort — 

A  bruising  struggle  all  within  the  bounds 

Of  butterfly  existence." 


A  COLLEGE  BREAKFAST-PARTY, 


"  I  protest," 
Burst  in  Laertes,  "  against  arguments 
That  start  with  calling  me  a  butterfly, 
A  bubble,  spark,  or  other  metaphor. 
Which  carries  your  conclusions,  as  a  phrase 
111  quibbling  law  will  carry  property. 
l\it  a  thin  sucker  for  my  human  lips 
I'^ed  at  a  mother's  breast,  who  now  needs  food 
What  I  will  earn  for  her ;  put  bubbles  blown 
From  frothy  thinking,  for  the  joy,  the  love, 
The  wants,  the  pity,  and  the  fellowship 
(The  ocean  deeps  I  might  say,  were  I  bent 
On  bandying  metaphors)  that  make  a  man — 
Why,  rhetoric  brings  within  your  easy  reach 
Conclusions  worthy  of — a  butterfly. 
The  universe,  I  hold,  is  no  charade. 
No  acted  pun  unriddled  by  a  word, 
Nor  pain  a  decimal  diminishing. 
With  hocus-pocus  of  a  dot  or  naught. 
For  those  who  know  it,  pain  is  solely  pain : 
Not  any  letters  of  the  alphabet 
Wrought  syllogistically  pattern-wise, 
Nor  any  cluster  of  fine  images. 
Nor  any  missing  of  their  figured  dance 
By  blundering  molecules.  Analysis 
May  show  you  the  right  physic  for  the  ill ; 
Teaching  the  molecules  to  find  their  dance, 
But  spare  me  your  analogies,  that  hold 
Such  insight  as  the  figure  of  a  crow 
And  bar  of  music  put  to  signify 
A  crowbar." 

Said  the  Priest,  "  There  I  agree — 
Would  add  that  sacramental  grace  is  grace 
Which  to  be  known  must  first  be  felt,  with  all 
The  strengthening  influxes  that  come  by  prayer 
I  note  this  passingly — would  not  delay 
The  conversation's  tenor,  save  to  hint 
That  taking  stand  with  Rosencranz  one  sees 
Final  equivalence  of  all  we  name 
Our  Good  and  111 — their  difference  meanwhile 
Being  inborn  prejudice  that  plumps  you  down 
An  Ego,  brings  a  weight  into  your  scale 


332 


A  COLLEGE  BREAKFAST  PARTY. 


Forcing  a  standard.    What  resistless  weight, 

Obstinate,  irremovable  by  thought, 

Persisting  through  disproof ;  an  ache,  a  need 

That  spaceless  stays  where  sharp  analysis 

Has  shown  a  plenum  filled  without  it — -what 

If  this,  to  use  your  phrase,  were  just  that  Being 

Not  looking  solely,  grasping  from  the  dark, 

Weighing  the  difference  you  call  Ego  ?  This 

Gives  you  persistence,  regulates  the  flux 

With  strict  relation  rooted  in  the  All. 

Who  is  he  of  your  late  philosophers 

Takes  the  true  name  of  Being  to  be  Will  ? 

I — nay,  the  Church  objects  naught,  is  content: 

Reason  has  reached  its  utmost  negative, 

Physic  and  metaphysic  meet  in  the  inane 

And  backward  shrink  to  intense  prejudice, 

Making  their  absolute  and  homogene 

A  loaded  relative,  a  choice  to  be 

Whatever  is — supposed :  a  What  is  not. 

The  Church  demands  no  more,  has  standing  room 

And  basis  for  her  doctrine:  this  (no  more) — 

That  the  strong  bias  which  we  name  the  Soul, 

Though  fed  and  clad  by  dissoluble  waves. 

Has  antecedent  quality,  and  rules 

By  veto  or  consent  the  strife  of  thought. 

Making  arbitrament  that  we  call  faith." 

Here  was  brief  silence,  till  young  Hamlet  spoke. 

"  I  crave  direction,  Father,  how  to  know 

The  sign  of  that  imperative  whose  right 

To  sway  my  act  in  face  of  thronging  doubts 

Were  an  oracular  gem  in  price  beyond 

Urim  and  Thummim  lost  to  Israel. 

That  bias  of  the  soul,  that  conquering  die 

Loaded  with  golden  emphasis  of  Will — 

How  find  it  where  resolve,  once  made,  becomes 

The  rash  exclusion  of  an  opposite 

Which  draws  the  stronger  as  I  turn  aloof." 

"I  think  I  hear  a  bias  in  your  words," 
The  Priest  said  mildly, — "that  strong  natural  bent 
Which  we  call  hunger.    What  more  positive 
Than  appetite  ? — of  spirit  or*  of  flesh, 


A  COLLEGE  BREAKFAST  PARTY, 


I  care  not — *  sense  of  need '  were  truer  phrase. 

You  hunger  for  authoritative  right, 

And  yet  discern  no  difference  of  tones, 

No  weight  of  rod  that  marks  imperial  rule  ? 

Laertes  granting,  I  will  put  your  case 

In  analogic  form :  the  doctors  hold 

Hunger  which  gives  no  relish — save  caprice 

That  tasting  venison  fancies  mellow  pears — 

A  symptom  of  disorder,  and  prescribe 

Strict  discipline.    Were  I  physician  here 

I  would  prescribe  that  exercise  of  soul 

Which  lies  in  full  obedience ;  you  ask, 

Obedience  to  what  ?    The  answer  lies 

Within  the  word  itself ;  for  how  obey 

What  has  no  rule,  asserts  no  absolute  claim? 

Take  inclination,  taste — why,  that  is  you, 

No  rule  about  you.    Science,  reasoning 

On  nature's  order — they  exist  and  move 

Solely  by  disputation,  hold  no  pledge 

Of  final  consequence,  but  push  the  swing 

Where  Epicurus  and  the  Stoic  sit 

In  endless  see-saw.    One  authority. 

And  only  one,  says  simply  this.  Obey : 

Place  yourself  in  that  current  (test  it  so !) 

Of  spiritual  order  where  at  least 

Lies  promise  of  a  high  communion, 

A  Head  informing  members.  Life  that  breathes 

With  gift  of  forces  over  and  above 

The  plus  of  arithmetic  interchange. 

'The  Church,  too,  has  a  body,'  you  object, 

*Can  be  dissected,  put  beneath  the  lens 

And  shown  the  merest  continuity 

Of  all  existence  else  beneath  the  sun.' 

I  grant  you ;  but  the  lens  will  not  disprove 

A  presence  which  eludes  it.    Take  your  wit, 

Your  highest  passion,  widest  -reaching  thought : 

Show  their  conditions  if  you  will  or  can. 

But  though  you  saw  the  final  atom-dance 

Mziking  each  molecule  that  stands  for  sign 

Of  love  being  present^  where  is  still  your  love? 

How  measure  that,  how  certify  its  weight  ? 

And  so  I  say,  the  body  of  the  Church 


334 


A  COLLEGE  BREAKFAST  PARTY, 


Carries  a  Presence,  promises  and  gifts 

Never  disproved — whose  argument  is  found 

In  lasting  failure  of  the  search  elsewhere 

For  what  it  holds  to  satisfy  man's  need, 

But  I  grow  lengthy  :  my  excuse  must  be 

Your  question,  Hamlet,  which  has  probed  right  through 

To  the  pitch  of  our  belief.    And  I  have  robbed 

Myself  of  pleasure  as  a  listener. 

Tis  noon,  I  see ;  and  my  appointment  stands 

For  half-past  twelve  with  Voltimand.  Good-by." 

Brief  parting,  brief  regret — sincere,  but  quenched 

In  fumes  of  best  Havana,  which  consoles 

For  lack  of  other  certitude.    Then  said,  * 

Mildly  sarcastic,  quiet  Guildenstern : 

"  I  marvel  how  the  Father  gave  new  charm 

To  weak  conclusions :  I  was  half  convinced 

The  poorest  reasoner  made  the  finest  man, 

And  held  his  logic  lovelier  for  its  limp." 

"I  fain  would  hear,"  said  Hamlet,  "how  you  find 

A  stronger  footing  than  the  Father  gave. 

How  base  your  self-resistance  save  on  faith 

In  some  invisible  Order,  higher  Right 

Than  changing  impulse.    What  does  Reason  bid? 

To  take  as  fullest  rationality 

What  offers  best  solution :  so  the  Church. 

Science,  detecting  hydrogen  aflame 

Outside  our  firmament,  leaves  mystery 

Whole  and  untouched  beyond;  nay,  in  our  blood 

And  in  the  potent  atoms  of  each  germ 

The  Secret  lives — envelops,  penetrates 

Whatever  sense  perceives  or  thought  divines. 

Science,  whose  soul  is  explanation,  halts 

With  hostile  front  at  mystery.    The  Church 

Takes  mystery  as  her  empire,  brings  its  wealth 

Of  possibility  to  fill  the  void 

'Twixt  contradictions — warrants  to  a  faith 

Defying  sense  and  all  its  ruthless  train 

Of  arrogant  'Therefores.'    Science  with  her  lens 

Dissolves  the  forms  that  made  the  other  half 

Of  all  our  love,  which  thenceforth  widowed  lives 

To  gaze  with  maniac  stare  at  what  is  not. 


A  COLLEGE  BREAKFAST  PARTY. 


33S 


The  Church  explains  not,  governs — feeds  resolve 
By  vision  fraught  with  heart-experience 
And  human  yearning." 

"  Ay,"  said  Guildenstern, 
With  friendly  nod,  "  the  Father,  I  can  see, 
Has  caught  you  up  in  his  air-chariot. 
His  thought  takes  rainbow-bridges,  out  of  reach 
By  solid  obstacles,  evaporates 
The  coarse  and  common  into  subtilties. 
Insists  that  what  is  real  in  the  Church 
Is  something  out  of  evidence,  and  begs 
(Just  in  parenthesis)  you'll  never  mind  \ 
What  stares  you  in  the  face  and  bruises  you. 
Why,  by  his  method  I  could  justify 
Each  superstition  and  each  tyranny 
That  ever  rode  upon  the  back  of  man, 
Pretending  fitness  for  his  sole  defence 
Against  life's  evil.    How  can  aught  subsist 
That  holds  no  theory  of  gain  or  good  ? 
Despots  with  terror  in  their  red,  right  hand 
Must  argue  good  to  helpers  and  themselves, 
Must  let  submission  hold  a  core  of  gain 
To  make  their  slaves  choose  life.    Their  theory, 
Abstracting  inconvenience  of  racks. 
Whip-lashes,  dragonnades  and  all  things  coarse 
Inherent  in  the  fact  or  concrete  mass, 
Presents  the  pure  idea — utmost  good 
Secured  by  Order  only  to  be  found 
In  strict  subordination,  hierarchy 
Of  forces  where,  by  nature's  law,  the  strong 
Has  rightful  empire,  rule  of  weaker  proved 
Mere  dissolution.    What  can  you  object  ? 
The  Inquisition — if  you  turn  away 
From  narrow  notice  how  the  scent  of  gold 
Has  guided  sense  of  damning  heresy — 
The  Inquisition  is  sublime,  is  love 
'Hindering  the  spread  of  poison  in  men's  souls : 
The  flames  are  nothing  :  only  smaller  pain 
To  hinder  greater,  or  the  pain  of  one  %,> 
To  save  the  many,  such  as  throbs  at  heart 
Of  every  system  born  into  the  world. 
So  of  the  Church  as  high  communion 


336  A  COLLEGE  BREAKFAST  PARTY. 


Of  Head  with  members,  fount  of  spirit  force 

Beyond  the  calculus,  and  carrying  proof 

In  her  sole  power  to  satisfy  man's  need : 

That  seems  ideal  truth  as  clear  as  lines 

That,  necessary  though  invisible,  trace 

The  balance  of  the  planets  and  the  sun — 

Until  I  find  a  hitch  in  that  last  claim. 

'To  satisfy  man's  need.*    Sir,  that  depends: 

We  settle  first  the  measure  of  man's  need 

Before  we  grant  capacity  to  fill. 

John,  James,  or  Thomas,  you  may  satisfy : 

But  since  you  choose  ideals,  I  demand 

Your  Church  shall  satisfy  ideal,  man. 

His  utmost  reason  and  his  utmost  love. 

And  say  these  rest  a-hungered — find  no  scheme 

Content  them  both,  but  hold  the  world  accursed 

A  Calvary  where  Reason  mocks  at  Love, 

And  Love  forsaken  sends  out  orphan  cries 

Hopeless  of  answer  ;  still  the  soul  remains 

Larger,  diviner  than  your  half-way  Church, 

Which  racks  your  reason  into  false  consent. 

And  soothes  your  Love  with  sops  of  selfishness." 

"  There  I  am  with  you,"  cried  Laertes.    "  What 

To  me  are  any  dictates,  though  they  came 

With  thunders  from  the  Mount,  if  still  within 

I  see  a  nigher  Right,  a  higher  Good 

Compelling  love  and  worship  ?    Though  the  earth 

Held  force  electric  to  discern  and  kill 

Each  thinking  rebel — what  is  martyrdom 

But  death-defying  utterance  of  belief. 

Which  being  mine  remains  my  truth  supreme, 

Though  solitary  as  the  throb  of  pain 

Lying  outside  the  pulses  of  the  world? 

Obedience  is  good:  ay,  but  to  what? 

And  for  what  ends  ?    For  say  that  I  rebel 

Against  your  rule  as  deviUsh,  or  as  rule 

Of  thunder-guiding  powers  that  deny 

Man's  highest  benefit:  rebellion  then 

Were  strict  obedience  to  another  rule 

Which  bids  me  flout  your  thunder." 

*<Lo  you  now!" 


A  COLLEGE  BREAKFAST  PARTY. 


Said  Osric,  delicately,  "how  you  come, 

Laertes  mine,  with  all  your  warring  zeal, 

As  Python-slayer  of  the  present  age — 

Cleansing  all  social  swamps  by  darting  rays 

Of  dubious  doctrine,  hot  with  energy 

Of  private  judgment  and  disgust  for  doubt — 

To»,state  my  thesis,  which  you  most  abhor 

When  sung  in  Daphnis-notes  beneath  the  pines 

To  gentle  rush  of  waters.    Your  belief — 

In  essence,  what  is  it  but  simply  Taste  ? 

I  urge  with  you  exemption  from  all  claims 

That  come  from  other  than  my  proper  will. 

An  Ultimate  within  to  balance  yours, 

A  solid  meeting  you,  excluding  you. 

Till  you  show  fuller  force  by  entering 

My  spiritual  space  and  crushing  Me 

To  a  subordinate  complement  of  You : 

Such  ultimate  must  stand  alike  for  all. 

Preach  your  crusade,  then ;  all  will  join  who  like 

The  hurly-burly  of  aggressive  creeds; 

Still  your  unpleasant  Ought,  your  itch  to  choose 

What  grates  upon  the  sense,  is  simply  Taste, 

Differs,  I  think,  from  mine  (permit  the  word,. 

Discussion  forces  it)  in  being  bad.'* 

The  tone  was  too  polite  to  breed  offence, 
Showing  a  tolerance  of  what  was  "  bad," 
Becoming  courtiers.    Louder  Rosencranz 
Took  up  the  ball  with  rougher  movement,  wont 
To  show  contempt  for  doting  reasoners 
Who  hugged  some  reasons  with  a  preference, 
As  warm  Laertes  did  :  he  gave  five  puffs 
Intolerantly  skeptical,  then  said. 

Your  human  good,  which  you  would  make  supreme, 
How  do  you  know  it  ?    Has  it  shown  its  face 
In  adamantine  type,  with  features  clear. 
As  this  republic,  or  that  monarchy  ? 
As  federal  grouping,  or  municipal  ? 
Equality,  or  finely  shaded  lines 
Of  social  difference  ?  ecstatic  whirl 
And  draught  intense  of  passionate  joy  and  pain, 
Or  sober  self-control,  that  starves  its  youth 


338 


A  COLLEGE  BREAKFAST  PARTY, 


And  lives  to  wonder  what  the  world  calls  joy  ? 

Is  it  in  sympathy  that  shares  men's  pangs, 

Or  in  cool  brains  that  can  explain  them  well  ? 

Is  it  in  labor,  or  in  laziness  ? 

In  training  for  the  tug  of  rivalry 

To  be  admired,  or  in  the  admiring  soul  ? 

In  risk,  or  certitude  ?    In  battling  rage 

And  hardy  challenges  of  Protean  luck, 

Or  in  a  sleek  and  rural  apathy 

Full  fed  with  sameness  ?    Pray  define  your  Good 

Beyond  rejection  by  majority ; 

Next,  how  it  may  subsist  without  the  111 

Which  seems  its  only  outline.    Show  a  world 

Of  pleasure  not  resisted  ;  or  a  world 

Of  pleasure  equalized,  yet  various 

In  action  formative;  for  that  will  serve 

As  illustration  of  your  human  good — 

Which  at  its  perfecting  (your  goal  of  hope) 

Will  not  be  straight  extinct,  or  fall  to  sleep 

In  the  deep  bosom  of  the  Unchangeable. 

What  will  you  work  for,  then,  and  call  it  good 

With  full  and  certain  vision — good  for  aught 

Save  partial  ends  which  happen  to  be  yours  ? 

How  will  you  get  your  stringency  to  bind 

Thought  or  desire  in  demonstrated  tracks 

Which  are  but  waves  within  a  balanced  whole? 

Is  *  Relative '  the  magic  word  that  turns 

Your  flux  mercurial  of  good  to  gold  ? 

Why,  that  analysis  at  which  you  rage 

As  anti-social  force  that  sweeps  you  down 

The  world  in  one  cascade  of  molecules. 

Is  brother  'relative' — and  grins  at  you 

Like  any  convict  whom  you  thought  to  send 

Outside  society,  till  this  enlarged. 

And  meant  New  England  and  Australia  too. 

The  Absolute  is  your  shadow,  and  the  space 

Which  you  say  might  be  real  were  you  milled 

To  curves  pellicular,  the  thinnest  thin, 

Equation  of  no  thickness,  is  still  you." 

"Abstracting  all  that  makes  him  clubbable," 
Horatio  interposed.    But  Rosencranz, 


A  COLLEGE  BREAKFAST  PARTY. 


Deaf  as  the  angry  turkey-cock,  whose  ears 

Are  plugged  by  swollen  tissues  when  he  scolds 

At  men's  pretensions  :    "  Pooh,  your  '  Relative ' 

Shuts  you  in,  hopeless,  with  your  progeny 

As  in  a  Hunger  tower ;  your  social  good, 

Like  other  deities  by  turn  supreme 

Is  transient  reflex  of  a  prejudice. 

Anthology  of  causes  and  effects 

To  suit  the  mood  of  fanatics  who  lead 

The  mood  of  tribes  or  nations.    I  admit 

If  you  could  show  a  sword,  nay,  chance  of  sword 

Hanging  conspicuous  to  their  inward  eyes. 

With  edge  so  constant  threatening  as  to  sway 

All  greed  and  lust  by  terror ;  and  a  law 

Clear-writ  and  proven  as  the  law  supreme 

Which  that  dread  sword  enforces — then  your  Right 

Duty,  or  social  Good,  were  it  once  brought 

To  common  measure  with  the  potent  law, 

Would  dip  the  scale,  would  put  unchanging  marks 

Of  wisdom  or  of  folly  on  each  deed, 

And  warrant  exhortation.    Until  then, 

Where  is  your  standard  or  criterion  ? 

*  What  always,  everywhere,  by  all  men ' — why, 

That  were  but  Custom,  and  your  system  needs 

Ideals  never  yet  incorporate. 

The  imminent  doom  of  Custom.    Can  you  find 

Appeal  beyond  the  sentience  in  each  man  ? 

Frighten  the  blind  with  scarecrows  ?  raise  an  awe 

Of  things  unseen  where  appetite  commands 

Chambers  of  imagery  in  the  soul 

At  all  its  avenues  ? — You  chant  your  hymns 

To  Evolution,  on  your  altar  lay 

A  sacred  egg  called  Progress :  have  you  proved 

A  Best  unique  where  all  is  relative, 

And  where  each  change  is  loss  as  well  as  gain  ? 

The  age  of  healthy  Saurians,  well  supplied 

With  heat  aftid  prey,  will  balance  well  enough 

A  human  age  where  maladies  are  strong 

And  pleasures  feeble ;  wealth  a  monster  gorged 

Mid  hungry  populations ;  intellect 

Aproned  in  laboratories,  bent  on  proof 

That  this  is  that,  and  both  are  good  for  naught 


340         ,    A  COLLEGE  BREAKFAST  PARTY. 

Save  feeding  error  through  a  weary  life ; 
While  Art  and  Poesy  struggle  like  poor  ghosts 
To  hinder  cock-crow  and  the  dreadful  light. 
Lurking  in  darkness  and  the  charnel-house, 
Or  like  two  stalwart  graybeards,  imbecile 
With  limbs  still  active,  playing  at  behef 
That  hunt  the  slipper,  foot-ball,  hide-and-seek 
Are  sweetly  merry,  donning  pinafores 
And  lisping  emulously  in  their  speech. 

0  human  race!  Is  this,  then,  all  thy  gain? — 
Working  at  disproof,  playing  at  belief, 
Debate  on  causes,  distate  of  effects, 

Power  to  transmute  all  elements,  and  Tack 
Of  any  power  to  sway  the  fatal  skill 
And  make  thy  lot  aught  else  than  rigid  doom. 
The  Saurians  were  better. — Guildenstern, 
Pass  me  the  taper.    Still  the  human  curse 
Has  mitigation  in  the  best  cigars.'* 

Then  swift  Laertes,  not  without  a  glare 
Of  leonine  wrath,  "  I  thank  thee  for  that  word : 
That  one  confession,  were  I  Socrates, 
Should  force  you  onward  till  you  ran  your  head 
At  your  own  image — flatly  gave  the  lie 
To  all  your  blasphemy  of  that  human  good 
Which  bred  and  nourished  you  to  sit  at  ease 
And  learnedly  deny  it.    Say  the  world 
Groans  ever  with  the  pangs  of  doubtful  births; 
Say,  life's  a  poor  donation  at  the  best — 
Wisdom  a  yearning  after  nothingness — 
Nature's  great  vision  and  the  thrill  supreme 
Of  thought-fed  passion  but  a  weary  play — 

1  argue  not  against  you.    Who  can  prove 
Wit  to  be  witty  when  the  deeper  ground 
Dvilness  intuitive  declares  wit  dull? 

If  life  is  worthless  to  you — why,  it  is. 

You  only  know  how  little  love  you  feel 

To  give  you  fellowship,  how  little  force 

Responsive  to  the  quality  of  things. 

Then  end  your  life,  throw  off  the  unsought  yoke. 

If  not — if  you  remain  to  taste  cigars. 

Choose  racy  diction,  perorate  at  large 


A  COLLEGE  BREAKFAST  PARTY 


With  tacit  scorn  of  meaner  men  who  win 

No  wreath  or  tripos — then  admit  at  least 

A  possible  Better  in  the  seeds  of  earth ; 

Acknowledge  debt  to  that  laborious  life 

Which,  sifting  evermore  the  mingled  seeds 

Testing  the  Possible  with  patient  skill, 

And  daring  ill  in  presence  of  a  good 

For  futures  to  inherit,  made  your  lot 

One  you  would  choose  rather  than  end  it,  nay, 

Rather  than,  say,  some  twenty  million  lots 

Of  fellow-Britons  toiling  all  to  make 

That  nation,  that  community,  whereon 

You  feed  and  thrive  and  talk  philosophy. 

T  am  no  optimist,  whose  faith  must  hang 

On  hard  pretence  that  pain  is  beautiful 

And  agony  explained  for  men  at  ease 

By  virtue's  exercise  in  pitying  it. 

But  this  I  hold :  that  he  who  takes  one  gift 

Made  for  him  by  the  hopeful  work  of  man. 

Who  tastes  sweet  bread,  walks  where  he  will  unarmed, 

His  shield  and  warrant  the  invisible  law. 

Who  owns  a  hearth  and  household  charities, 

Who  clothes  his  body  and  his  sentient  soul 

With  skill  and  thoughts  of  men,  and  yet  denies 

A  human  good  worth  toiling  for,  is  cursed 

With  worse  negation  than  the  poet  feigned 

In  Mephistopheles.    The  Devil  spins 

His  wire-drawn  argument  against  all  good 

With  sense  of  brimstone  as  his  private  lot, 

And  never  drew  a  solace  from  the  Earth.'* 

Laertes  fuming  paused,  and  Guildenstern 
Took  up  with  cooler  skill  the  fusillade  : 
"  I  meet  your  deadliest  challenge,  Rosencranz : — 
Where  get,  you  say,  a  binding  law,  a  rule 
Enforced  by  sanction,  an  Ideal  throned 
With  thunder  in  its  hand  ?   I  answer,  there 
Whence  every  faith  and  rule  has  drawn  its  force 
Since  human  consciousness  awaking  owned 
An  outward,  whose  unconquerable  sway 
Resisted  first  and  then  subdued  desire 
By  pressure  of  the  dire  Impossible 


342 


A  COLLEGE  BREAKFAST  PARTY, 


Urging  to  possible  ends  the  active  soul 

And  shaping  so  its  terror  and  its  love. 

Why,  you  have  said  it — threats  and  promises 

Depend  on  each  man's  sentence  for  their  force: 

All  sacred  rules,  imagined  or  revealed, 

Can  have  no  form  or  potency  apart 

From  the  percipient  and  emotive  mind. 

God,  duty,  love,  submission,  fellowship, 

Must  first  be  framed  in  man,  as  music  is, 

Before  they  live  outside  him  as  a  law. 

And  still  they  grow  and  shape  themselves  anew. 

With  fuller  concentration  in  their  life 

Of  inward  and  of  outward  energies 

Blending  to  make  the  last  result  called  Man, 

Which  means,  not  this  or  that  philosopher 

Looking  through  beauty  into  blankness,  not 

The  swindler  who  has  sent  his  fruitful  lie 

By  the  last  telegram  :  it  means  the  tide 

Of  needs  reciprocal,  toil,  trust,  and  love — 

The  surging  multitude  of  human  claims 

Which  make  'a  presence  not  to  be  put  by' 

Above  the  horizon  of  the  general  soul. 

Is  inward  Reason  shrunk  to  subtleties. 

And  inward  wisdom  pining  passion- starved? — 

The  outward  Reason  has  the  world  in  store. 

Regenerates  passion  with  the  stress  of  want, 

Regenerates  knowledge  with  discovery. 

Shows  sly  rapacious  Self  a  blunderer, 

Widens  dependence,  knits  the  social  whole 

In  sensible  relation  more  defined. 

Do  Boards  and  dirty-handed  millionaires 

Govern  the  planetary  system? — sway 

The  pressure  of  the  Universe  ? — decide 

That  man  henceforth  shall  retrogress  to  ape, 

Emptied  of  every  sympathetic  thrill 

The  All  has  wrought  in  him  ?  dam  up  henceforth 

The  flood  of  human  claims  as  private  force 

To  turn  their  wheels  and  make  a  private  hell 

For  fish-pond  to  their  mercantile  domain? 

What  are  they  but  a  parasitic  growth 

On  the  vast  real  and  ideal  world 

Of  man  and  nature  blent  in  one  divine  ? 


A  COLLEGE  BREAKL'AST  PARTY. 


Why,  take  your  closing  dirge — say  evil  grows 

And  good  is  dwindling ;  science  mere  decay, 

Mere  dissolution  of  ideal  wholes 

Which  through  the  ages  past  alone  have  made 

The  earth  and  firmament  of  human  faith; 

Say,  the  small  arc  of  Being  we  call  man 

Is  near  its  mergence,  what  seems  growing  life 

Naught  but  a  hurrying  change"  towards  lower  types, 

The  ready  rankness  of  degeneracy. 

Well,  they  who  mourn  for  the  world's  dying  good 

May  take  their  common  sorrows  for  a  rock. 

On  it  erect  religion  and  a  church, 

A  worship,  rites,  and  passionate  piety — 

The  worship  of  the  Best  though  crucified 

And  God-forsaken  in  its  dying  pangs ; 

The  sacramental  rites  of  fellowship 

In  common  woe  ;  visions  that  purify 

Through  admiration  and  despairing  love, 

Which  keep  their  spiritual  life  intact 

Beneath  the  murderous  clutches  of  disproof 

And  feed  a  martyr-strength." 

Religion  high  !  " 
(Rosencranz  here)  "  but  with  communicants 
Few  as  the  cedars  upon  Lebanon — 
A  child  might  count  them.    What  the  world  demands 
Is  faith  coercive  of  the  multitude." 

'*  Tush,  Guildenstern,  you  granted  him  too  much, 

Burst  in  Laertes  ;  "  I  will  never  grant 

One  inch  of  law  to  feeble  blasphemies 

Which  hold  no  higher  ratio  to  life — 

Full  vigorous  human  life  that  peopled  earth. 

And  wrought  and  fought  and  loved  and  bravely  died — 

Than  the  sick  njorning  glooms  of  debauchees. 

Old  nations  breed  old  children,  wizened  babes 

Whose  youth  is  lanquid  and  incredulous 

Weary  of  life  without  the  will  to  die ; 

Their  passions  visionary  appetites 

Of  bloodless  spectres  wailing  that  the  world 

For  lack  of  substance  slips  from  out  their  grasp  ; 

Their  thoughts  the  withered  husks  of  all  things  dead, 

Holding  no  force  of  germs  instinct  with  life, 


344 


A  COLLEGE  BREAKFAST  PARTY, 


Which  never  hesitates  but  moves  and  grows. 

Yet  hear  them  boast  in  screams  their  godlike  ill, 

Excess  of  knowing  !    Fie  on  you,  Rosencranz  ! 

You  lend  your  brains  and  fine-dividing  tongue 

For  bass-notes  to  this  shrivelled  crudity. 

This  immature  decrepitude  that  strains 

To  fill  our  ears  and  claim  the  prize  of  strength 

For  mere  unmanliness.    Out  on  them  all ! — 

Wits,  puling  minstrels,  and  philosophers, 

Who  living  softly  prate  of  suicide, 

And  suck  the  commonwealth  to  feed  their  ease 

While  they  vent  epigrams  and  threnodies. 

Mocking  or  wailing  all  the  eager  work 

Which  makes  that  public  store  whereon  they  feed. 

Is  wisdom  flattened  sense  and  mere  distaste? 

Why,  any  superstition  warm  with  love, 

Inspired  with  purpose,  wild  with  energy 

That  streams  resistless  through  his  ready  frame. 

Has  more  of  human  truth  within  its  life 

Than  souls  that  look  through  color  into  naught, — 

Whose  brain,  too  unimpassioned  for  delight, 

Has  feeble  ticklings  of  a  vanity 

Which  finds  the  universe  beneath  its  mark. 

And  scorning  the  blue  heavens  as  merely  blue 

Can  only  say,  '  What  then  ?  — pre-eminent 

In  wondrous  want  of  likeness  to  their  kind 

Founding  that  worship  of  sterility 

Whose  one  supreme  is  vacillating  Will 

Which  makes  the  Light,  then  says,  ^'Twere  better  not.'" 

Here  rash  Laertes  brought  his  Handel-strain 
As  of  some  angry  Polypheme,  to  pause ; 
And  Osric,  shocked  at  ardors  out  of  taste, 
Reheved  the  audience  with  a  tenor  voice 
And  delicate  delivery. 

"  For  me, 

I  range  myself  in  line  with  Rosencranz 
Against  all  schemes,  religious  or  profane, 
That  flaunt  a  Good  as  pretext  for  a  lash 
To  flog  us  all  who  have  the  better  taste. 
Into  conformity,  requiring  me 
At  peril  of  the  thong  and  sharp  disgrace 


A  COLLEGE  BREAKFAST  PARTY, 


To  care  how  mere  Philistines  pass  their  Hves; 

Whether  the  EngHsh  pauper-total  grows 

From  one  to  two  before  the  naughts;  how  far 

Teuton  will  outbreed  Roman  ;  if  the  class 

Of  proletaires  will  make  a  federal  band 

To  bind  all  Europe  and  America, 

Throw,  in  their  wrestling,  every  government. 

Snatch  the  world's  purse  and  keep  the  guillotine: 

Or  else  (admitting  these  are  casualties) 

Driving  my  soul  with  scientific  hail 

That  shuts  the  landscape  out  with  particles, 

Insisting  that  the  Palingenesis 

Means  telegraphs  and  measure  of  the  rate 

At  which  the  stars  move — nobody  knows  where. 

So  far,  my  Rosencranz,  we  are  at  one. 

But  not  when  you  blaspheme  the  life  of  Art, 

The  sweet  perennial  youth  of  Poesy, . 

Which  asks  no  logic  but  its  sensuous  growth. 

No  right  but  loveliness  ;  which  fearless  strolls 

Betwixt  the  burning  mountain  and  the  sea, 

Reckless  of  earthquake  and  the  lava  stream. 

Filling  its  hour  with  beauty.    It  knows  naught 

Of  bitter  strife,  denial,  grim  resolve. 

Sour  resignation,  busy  emphasis 

Of  fresh  illusions  named  the  new-born  True, 

Old  Error's  latest  child ;  but  as  a  lake 

Images  all  things,  yet  within  its  depths 

Dreams  them  all  lovelier — thrills  with  sound 

And  makes  a  harp  of  plenteous  liquid  chords — ^ 

So  Art  or  Poesy  :  we  its  votaries 

Are  the  Olympians,  fortunately  born 

From  the  elemental  mixture  ;  'tis  our  lot 

To  pass  more  swiftly  than  the  Delian  God, 

But  still  the  earth  breaks  into  flowers  for  us. 

And  mortal  sorrows  when  they  reach  our  ears 

Are  dying  falls  to  melody  divine. 

Hatred,  war,  vice,  crime,  sin,  those  human  storms, 

Cyclones,  floods,  what  you  will — outbursts  of  force — 

Feed  art  with  contrast,  give  the  grander  touch 

To  the  master's  pencil  and  the  poet's  song, 

Serve  as  Vesuvian  fires  or  navies  tossed 

On  yawning  Waters,  which  when  viewed  alar 


A  COLLEGE  BREAKFAST  PARTY, 


Deepen  the  calm  sublime  of  those  choice  souls 

Who  keep  the  heights  of. poesy  and  turn 

A  fleckless  mirror  to  the  various  world, 

Giving  its  many-named  and  fitful  flux 

An  imaged,  harmless,  spiritual  life, 

With  pure  selection,  native  to  art's  frame, 

Of  beauty  only,  save  its  minor  scale 

Of  ill  and  pain  to  give  the  ideal  joy 

A  keener  edge.    This  is  a  mongrel  globe, 

All  finer  being  wrought  from  its  coarse  earth 

Is  but  accepted  privilege  :  what  else 

Your  boasted  virtue,  which  proclaims  itself 

A  good  above  the  average  consciousness? 

Nature  exists  by  partiality 

(Each  planet's  poise  must  carry  two  extremes 

With  verging  breadths  of  minor  wretchedness): 

We  are  her  favorites  and  accept  our  wings. 

For  your  accusal,  Rosencranz,  that  Art 

Shares  in  the  dread  and  weakness  of  the  time, 

I  hold  it  null ;  since  Art  or  Poesy  pure. 

Being  blameless  by  all  standards  save  her  own, 

Takes  no  account  of  modern  or  antique 

In  morals,  science,  or  .philosophy ; 

No  dull  elenchus  makes  a  yoke  for  her, 

Whose  law  and  measure  are  the  sweet  consent 

Of  sensibilities  that  move  apart 

From  rise  or  fall  of  systems,  states  or  creeds — 

Apart  from  what  Philistines  call  man's  weal." 

"Ay,  we  all  know  those  votaries  of  the  Muse 
Ravished  with  singing  till  they  quite  forgot 
Their  manhood,  sang,  and  gaped,  and  took  no  food^ 
Then  died  of  emptiness,  and  for  reward 
Lived  on  as  grasshoppers." — Laertes  thus : 
But  then  he  checked  himself  as  one  who  feels 
His  muscles  dangerous,  and  Guildenstern 
Filled  up  the  pause  with  calmer  confidence. 

"You  use  your  wings,  my  Osric,  poise  yourself 
Safely  outside  all  reach  of  argument, 
Then  dogmatize  at  will  (a  method  known 
To  ancient  women  and  philosophers, 


A  COLLEGE  BREAKFAST  PARTY, 


Nay,  to  Philistines  whom  you  most  abhor)  ; 
Else,  could  an  arrow  reach  you,  I  should  ask 
Whence  came  taste,  beauty,  sensibilities 
Refined  to  preference  infallible  ? 
Doubtless,  ye're  gods — these  odors  ye  inhale, 
A  sacrificial  scent.    But  how,  I  pray. 
Are  odors  made,  if  not  by  gradual  change 
Of  sense  or  substance  ?    Is  your  beautiful 
A  seedless,  rootless  flower,  or  has  it  grown 
With  human  growth,  which  means  the  rising  sum 
Of  human  struggle,  order,  knowledge? — sense 
Trained  to  a  fuller  record,  more  exact- 
To  truer  guidance  of  each  passionate  force? 
Get  me  your  roseate  flesh  without  the  blood, 
Get  fine  aromas  without  structure  wrought 
From  simpler  being  into  manifold  : 
Then  and  then  only  flaunt  your  Beautiful 
As  what  can  live  apart  from  thought,  creeds,  states. 
Which  mean  life's  structure.    Osric,  I  beseech — 
The  infallible  should  be  more  catholic — 
Join  in  a  war-dance  with  the  cannibals, 
Hear  Chinese  music,  love  a  face  tattooed. 
Give  adoration  to  a  pointed  skull, 
And  think  the  Hindu  Siva  looks  divine 
'Tis  art,  'tis  poesy.    Say,  you  object : 
How  came  you  by  that  lofty  dissidence. 
If  not  through  changes  in  the  social  man 
Widening  his  consciousness  from  Here  and  Now 
To  larger  wholes  beyond  the  reach  of  sense ; 
Controlling  to  a  fuller  harmony 
The  thrill  of  passion  and  the  rule  of  fact : 
And  paling  false  ideals  in  the  light 
Of  full-rayed  sensibilities,  which  blend 
Truth  and  desire  ?    Taste,  beauty,  what  are  they 
But  the  soul's  choice  towards  perfect  bias  wrought 
By  finer  balance  of  a  fuller  growth — 
Sense  brought  to  subtlest  metamorphosis 
Through  love,  thought,  joy — the  general  human  store 
Which  grows  from  all  fife's  functions  ?    As  the  plant 
Holds  its  corolla,  purple,  delicate, 
Solely  as  outflush  of  that  energy 
Which  moves  transformingly  in  root  and  branch, 


348 


A  COLLEGE  BREAKFAST  PARTY. 


Guildenstern  paused,  and  Hamlet  quivering 

Since  Osric  spoke,  in  transit  imminent 

From  catholic  striving  into  laxity, 

Ventured  his  word.    "  Seems  to  me,  Guildenstern, 

Your  argument,  though  shattering  Osric's  point 

That  sensibilities  can  move  apart 

From  social  order,  yet  has  not  annulled 

His  thesis  that  the  life  of  poesy 

(Admitting  it  must  grow  from  out  the  whole) 

Has  separare  functions,  a  transfigured  realm 

Freed  from  the  rigors  of  the  practical, 

Where  what  is  hidden  from  the  grosser  world — 

Stormed  down  by  roar  of  engines  and  the  shouts 

Of  eager  concourse — rises  beauteous 

As  voice  of  water-drops  in  sapphire  caves; 

A  realm  where  finest  spirits  have  free  sway 

In  exquisite  selection,  uncontrolled 

By  hard  material  necessity 

Of  cause  and  consequence.    For  you  will  grant 
The  Ideal  has  discoveries  which  ask 
No  test,  no  faith,  save  that  v/e  joy  in  them : 
A  new-found  continent,  with  spreading  lands 
Where  pleasure  charters  all,  where  virtue,  rank, 
Use,  right,  and  truth  have  but  one  name,  Delight. 
Thus  Art's  creations,  when  etherealized 
To  least  admixture  of  the  grosser  fact 
Delight  may  stamp  as  highest." 

"  Possible ! 

Said  Guildenstern,  with  touch  of  weariness, 
"  But  then  we  might  dispute  of  what  is  gross, 
What  high,  what  low." 

"Nay,"  said  Laertes, ask 
The  mightiest  makers  who  have  reigned,  still  reign 
Within  the  ideal  realm.    See  if  their  thought 
Be  drained  of  practice,  and  the  thick,  warm  blood 
Of  hearts  that  beat  in  action  various 
Through  the  wide  drama  of  the  struggling  world. 
Good-by,  Horatio." 

Each  now  said  "  Good-by." 
Such  breakfast,  such  beginning  of  the  day 


A  COLLEGE  BREAKFAST  PARTY. 


349 


Is  more  than  half  the  whole.    The  sun  was  hot 

On  southward  branches  of  the  meadow  elms, 

The  shadows  slowly  farther  crept  and  veered 

Like  changing  memories,  and  Hamlet  strolled 

Alone  and  dubious  on  the  empurpled  path 

Between  the  waving  grasses  of  new  June 

Close  by  the  stream  where  well-compacted  boats 

Were  moored  or  moving  with  a  lazy  creak 

To  the  soft  dip  of  oars.    All  sounds  were  light 

As  tiny  silver  bells  upon  the  robes 

Of  hovering  silence.    Birds  made  twitterings 

That  seemed  but  Silence' self  o'erfull  of  love. 

'Twas  invitation  all  to  sweet  repose ; 

And  Hamlet,  drowsy  with  the  mingled  draughts 

Of  cider  and  conflicting  sentiments. 

Choose  a  green  couch,  and  watched  with  half-closed  eyes 

The  meadow-road,  the  stream  and  dreamy  lights, 

Until  they  merged  themselves  in  sequence  strange 

With  undulating  ether,  time,  the  souF, 

The  will  supreme,  the  individual  claim, 

The  social  Ought,  the  lyrist's  liberty, 

Democritus,  Pythagoras  in  talk 

With  Anselm,  Darwin,  Comte,  and  Schopenhauer, 

The  poets  rising  slow  from  out  their  tombs 

Summoned  as  arbiters— that  border-world 

Of  dozing,  ere  the  sense  is  fully  locked.  ' 

And  then  he  dreamed  a  dream  so  luminous 

He  woke  (he  says)  convinced  ;  but  what  it  taught 

Withholds  as  yet.    Perhaps  those  graver  shades 

Admonished  him  mat  visions  told  in  haste 

Part  with  their  virtues  to  the  squandering  lips, 

And  leave  the  soul  in  wider  emptiness. 

April,  18'^^. 


TWO  LOVERS 


Two  lovers  by  a  moss-grown  spring : 
They  leaned  soft  cheeks  together  there; 
Mingled  the  dark  and  sunny  hair, 
And  heard  the  wooing  thrushes  sing. 

O  budding  time! 
O  love's  best  prime! 

Two  wedded  from  the  portal  stept : 
The  bells  made  happy  carollings, 
The  air  was  soft  as  fanning  wings, 
White  petals  on  the  pathway  slept. 

O  pure  eyed  bride! 
O  tender  pride! 


Two  faces  o'er  a  cradle  bent : 

Two  hands  above  the  head  were  locked ; 
These  pressed  each  other  while  they  rockcdj. 
Those  watched  a  life  that  love  had  sent. 

O  solemn  hour! 
O  hidden  power ! 


Two  parents  by  the  evening  fire : 
The  red  light  fell  about  their  knees, 
On  heads  that  rose  by  slow  degrees 
Like  buds  upon  the  lily  spire. 

O  patient  life! 
O  tender  strife ! 


The  two  still  sat  together  there, 

The  red  light  shown  about  their  knees ; 
But  all  the  heads  by  slow  degrees 
Had  gone  and  left  that  lonely  pair. 

O  voyage  fast ! 
O  vanished  past! 


SELF  AND  LIFE. 


The  red  light  shone  upon  the  floor 

And  made  the  space  between  them  wide; 
They  drew  their  chairs  up  side  by  side, 
Their  pale  cheeks  joined,  and  said  *'  Once  more ! " 
O  memories! 
O  past  that  is  1 

1866. 


SELF  AND  LIFE. 


Self. 

Changeful  comrade,  Life  of  mine. 

Before  we  two  mu^t  part, 
1  will  tell  thee,  thou  shalt  say, 

What  thou  hast  been  and  art. 
Ere  I  lose  my  hold  of  thee, 
Justify  thyself  to  me. 

Life. 

I  was  thy  warmth  upon  thy  mother's  knee 

When  light  and  love  within  her  eyes  were  one ; 

We  laughed  together  by  the  laurel-tree, 

Culling  warm  daisies  'neath  the  sloping  sun ; 

We  heard  the  chickens'  lazy  croon. 

Where  the  trellised  woodbines  grew, 
And  all  the  summer  afternoon 
Mystic  gladness  o'er  thee  threw. 
Was  it  person?    Was  it  thing? 
Was  it  touch  or  whispering? 
It  was  bliss  and  it  was  I : 
Bliss  was  what  thou  knew'st  me  by 

Self. 

Soon  I  knew  thee  more  by  Fear 
And  sense  of  what  was  not, 


352  SELF  AND  LIFE, 

Haunting  all  I  held  most  dear ; 

I  had  a  double  lot: 
Ardor,  cheated  with  alloy, 
Wept  the  more  for  dreams  of  joyo 

Life. 

Remember  how  thy  ardor's  magic  sense 

Made  poor  things  rich  to  thee  and  small  things  great ; 
How  hearth  and  garden,  field  and  bushy  fence 

Were  thy  own  eager  love  incorporate ; 

And  how  the  solemn,  splendid  Past 

O'er  thy  early  widened  earth 
Made  grandeur,  as  on  sunset  cast 
Dark  elms  near  take  mighty  girth, 
Hands  and  feet  were  tiny  still 
When  we  knew  the  historic  thrill, 
Breathed  deep  breath  in  heroes  dead. 
Tasted  the  immortals'  bread. 

SelFc 

Seeing  what  I  might  have  been 

Reproved  the  thing  I  was, 
Sm«ke  on  heaven's  clearest  sheen, 

The  speck  within  the  rose. 
By  revered  ones'  frailties  stung 
Reverence  was  with  anguish  wrung. 

Life. 

But  all  thy  anguish  and  thy  discontent 
Was  growtn  of  mind,  the  elemental  strife 

Toward  feeling  manifold  with  vision  blent 
To  wider  thought :  I  was  no  vulgar  life, 

That,  like  the  water-mirrored  ape, 
Not  discerns  the  thing  it  sees, 
Nor  knows  its  own  in  others'  shape. 
Railing,  scorning,  at  its  ease. 

Half  man's  truth  must  hidden  lie 
If  unlit  by  Sorrow's  eye. 
I  by  Sorrow  wrought  in  thee 
Willing  pain  of  ministiy. 


SELF  AND  LIFE. 


353 


Self. 

Slowly  was  the  lesson  taught 

Through  passion,  error,  care ; 
Insight  was  with  loathing  fraught, 

And  effort  with  despair. 
Written  on  the  wall  I  saw 
Bow !"  I  knew,  not  loved,  the  law. 

Life. 

But  then  I  brought  a  love  that  wrote  within 
The  law  of  gratitude,  and  made  thy  heart 

Beat  to  the  heavenly  tune  of  seraphin 
Whose  only  joy  in  having  is  to  impart: 

Till  thou,  poor  self — despite  thy  ire, 

Wrestling  'gainst  my  mingled  share. 
Thy  faults,  hard  falls,  and  vain  desire 
Still  to  be  what  others  were — 

Filled,  o'erflowed  with  tenderness 
Seeming  more  as  thou  wert  less. 
Knew  me  through  that  anguish  past 
As  a  fellowship  more  vast. 

Self. 

Yea,  I  embrace  thee,  changeful  Life ! 

Far-sent,  unchosen  mate ! 
Self  and  thou,  no  more  at  strife, 

Shall  wed  in  hallowed  state. 
Willing  spousals  now  shall  prove 
Life  is  justified  by  love. 
Poems— 12. 


^*  SWEET  EVENINGS  COME  AND  GO,  LOVE/' 


«•  La  noche  buena  se  viene, 

La  noche  buena  se  va, 
Y  nosotros  nos  iremos 

Y  no  volveremos  mas." 

— Old  Villancico, 

Sweet  evenings  come  and  go,  love, 
They  came  and  went  of  yore : 

This  evening  of  our  life,  love, 
Shall  go  and  come  no  more. 

When  we  have  passed  away,  love, 
All  things  will  keep  their  name ; 

But  yet  no  life  on  earth,  love. 
With  ours  will  be  the  same. 

The  daisies  will  be  there,  love, 
The  stars  in  heaven  will  shine: 

I  shall  not  feel  thy  wish,  love. 
Nor  thou  my  hand  in  thine. 

A  better  time  will  come,  love. 

And  better  souls  be  born : 
I  would  not  be  the  best,  love. 

To  leave  thee  now  forlorn. 


■f 


THE  DEATH  OF  MOSES. 


Moses,  who  spake  with  God  as  with  his  friend, 
And  ruled  his  people  with  the  twofold  power 
Of  wisdom  that  can  dare  and  still  be  meek, 
Was  writing  his  last  word,  the  sacred  name 
Unutterable  of  that  Eternal  Will 
Which  was  and  is  and  evermore  shall  be. 
Yet  was  his  task  not  finished,  for  the  flock 
Needed  its  shepherd,  and  the  life-taught  sage 
Leaves  no  successor  ;  but  to  chosen  men. 
The  rescuers  and  guides  of  Israel, 
A  death  was  given  called  the  Death  of  Grace, 
Which  freed  them  from  the  burden  of  the  flesh. 
But  left  them  rulers  of  the  multitude. 
And  loved  companions  of  the  lonely.  This 
Was  God's  last  gift  to  Moses,  this  the  hour 
When  soul  must  part  from  self  and  be  but  soul. 

God  spake  to  Gabriel,  the  messenger 

Of  raildest  death  that  draws  the  parting  life 

Gently,  as  when  a  little  rosy  child 

Lifts  up  its  lips  from  off  the  bowl  of  milk, 

And  so  draws  forth  a  curl  that  dipped  its  gold 

In  the  soft  white — thus  Gabriel  draws  the  soul. 

"  Go,  bring  the  soul  of  Moses  unto  me  !  " 

And  the  awe-stricken  angel  answered,  "  Lord, 

How  shall  I  dare  to  take  his  life  who  lives 

Sole  of  his  kind,  not  to  be  hkened  once 

In  all  the  generations  of  the  earth?" 

Then  God  called  Michael,  him  of  pensive  brow, 
Snow-vest  and  flaming  sword,  who  knows  and  acts. 
"Go  bring  the  spirit  of  Moses  unto  me!" 
But  Michael,  with  such  grief  as  angels  feel, 
Loving  the  mortals  whom  they  succor,  plead: 


356 


THE  DEATH  OF  MOSES, 


"Almighty,  spare  me;  it  was  I  who  taught 
Thy  servant  Moses ;  he  is  part  of  me 
As  I  of  thy  deep  secrets,  knowing  them." 

Then  God  called  Zamael,  the  terrible, 

The  angel  of  fierce  death,  of  agony 

That  comes  in  battle  and  in  pestilence, 

Remorseless,  sudden,  or  with  lingering  throes. 

And  Zamael,  his  raiment  and  broad  wings 

Blood-tinctured,  the  dark  lustre  of  his  eyes 

Shrouding  the  red,  fell  like  the  gathering  night 

Before  the  prophet.    But  that  radiance 

Won  from  the  heavenly  presence  in  the  mount 

Gleamed  on  the  prophet's  brow^  and  dazzling  pierced 

Its  conscious  opposite :  the  angel  turned 

His  murky  gaze  aloof  and  inly  said : 

"  An  angel  this,  deathless  to  angel's  stroke." 

But  Moses  felt  the  subtly  nearing  dark: 

"Who  art  thou?  and  what  wilt  thou?"    Zamael  then  i 

I  am  God's  reaper :  through  the  fields  of  life 
I  gather  ripened  and  unripened  souls, 
Both  willing  and  unwilling.    And  I  come 
1  Now  to  reap  thee."    But  Moses  cried. 
Firm  as  a  seer  who  waits  the  trusted  sign : 
"  Reap  thou  the  fruitless  plant  and  common  herb — 
Not  him  who  from  the  womb  was  sanctified  • 
To  teach  the  law  of  purity  and  love." 
And  Zamael,  baffl'ed  from  his  errand,  fled. 

But  Moses,  pausing,  in  the  air  serene 
Heard  now  that  mystic  whisper,  far  yet  near, 
The  all-penetrating  Voice,  that  said  to  him, 

Moses,  the  hour  is  come  and  thou  must  die."  > 
"Lord,  I  obey;  but  thou  rememberest 
How  thou.  Ineffable,  didst  take  me  once 
Within  thy  orb  of  light  untouched  by  death." 
Then  the  voice  answered,  ''Be  no  more  afraid: 
With  me  shall  be  thy  death  and  burial." 
So  Moses  waited,  ready  now  to  die. 

And  the  Lord  came,  invisible  as  a  thought, 


THE  DEA  TH  OF  MOSES. 


Three  angels  gleaming  on  his  secret  track, 

Prince  Michael,  Zamael,  Gabriel,  charged  to  guard 

The  soul-forsaken  body  as  it  fell 

And  bear  it  to  the  hidden  sepulchre 

Denied  for  ever  to  the  search  of  man. 

And  the  Voice  said  to  Moses  :  "  Close  thine  eyes." 

He  closed  them,    "Lay  thme  hand  upon  thine  heart, 

And  draw  thy  feet  together."    He  obeyed. 

And  the  Lord  said,  "O  spirit!  child  of  mine! 

A  hundred  years  and  twenty  thou  hast  dwelt 

Within  this  tabernacle  wrought  of  clay. 

This  is  the  end :  come  forth  and  flee  to  heaven." 

But  the  grieved  soul  with  plaintive  pleading  cried, 
"I  love  this  body  with  a  clinging  love: 
The  courage  fails  me,  Lord,  to  part  from  it." 

"  O  child,  come  forth !  for  thou  shalt  dwell  with  me 
About  the  immortal  throne,  where  seraphs  joy 
In  growing  vision  and  in  growing  love." 

Yet  hesitating,  fluttering,  like  the  bird 

With  young  wing  weak  and  dubious,  the  soul 

Stayed.    But  behold  !  upon  the  death-dewed  lips 

A  kiss  descended,  pure,  unspeakable — 

The  bodiless  Love  without  embracing  Love 

That  lingered  in  the  body,  drew  it  forth 

With  heavenly  strength  and  carried  it  to  heaven. 

But  now  beneath  the  sky  the  watchers  all. 

Angels  that  keep  the  homes  of  Israel, 

Or  on  high  purpose  wander  o'er  the  world 

Leading  the  Gentiles,  felt  a  dark  eclipse: 

The  greatest  ruler  among  men  was  gone. 

And  from  the  westward  sea  was  heard  a  wail, 

A  dirge  as  from  the  isles  of  Javanim, 

Crying,  "Who  now  is  left  upon  the  earth 

Like  him  to  teach  the  right  and  smite  the  wrong!'* 

And  from  the  East,  far  o'er  the  Syrian  waste, 

Came  slowlier,  sadlier,  the  answering  dirge: 

"  No  prophet  like  him  lives  or  shall  arise 

In  Israel  or  the  world  for  evermore." 


358 


THE  DBA  TH  OF  MOSES. 


But  Israel  waited,  looking  toward  the  mount, 

Till  with  the  deepening  ev^  the  elders  came, 

Saying,  "  His  burial  is  hid  with  God. 

He  stood  far  off  and  saw  the  angels  lift 

His  corpse  aloft  until  they  seemed  a  star 

That  burnt  itself  away  within  the  sky." 

The  people  answered  with  mut^  orphaned  gaze, 

Looking  for  what  had  vanished  evermore. 

Then  through  the  gloom  without  them  and  within 

The  spirit's  shaping  light,  mysterious  speech, 

Invisible  Will  wrought  clear  in  sculptured  sound, 

The  thought-begotten  daughter  of  the  voice, 

Thrilled  on  their  "listening  sense  :  "  He  has  no  tomb. 

He  dwells  not  with  you  dead,  but  lives  as  Law." 


ARION. 
(Herod.  L  24.) 


Arion,  whose  melodic  soul 
Taught  the  dithyramb  to  roll 

Like  forest  fires,  and  sing 

Olympian  suffeyng, 

Had  carried  his  diviner  lore 
From  Corinth  to  the  sister  shore 

Where  Greece  could  largelier  be, 

Branching  o'er  Italy. 

Then  weighted  with  his  glorious  name 
And  bags  of  gold,  aboard  he  came 

'Mid  harsh,  seafaring  men 

To  Corinth  bound  again.  i 

The  sailors  eyed  the  bags  and  thought : 
♦*  The  gold  is  good,  the  man  is  naught — 


ARTON. 


And  who  shall  track  the  wave 
That  opens  for  his  grave  ?  " 

With  brawny  arms  and  cruel  eyes 
They  press  around  him  where  he  lies 
In  sleep  beside  his  lyre, 
Hearing  the  Muses  choir. 

He  waked  and  saw  this  wolf-faced  Death 
Breaking  the  dream  that  filled  his-  breath 

With  inspiration  strong 

Of  yet  unchanted  song. 

"Take,  take  my  gold  and  let  me  live! " 

He  prayed,  as  kings  do  when  they  give 
Their  all  with  royal  will, 
Holding  born  kingship  still. 

To  rob  the  living  they  refuse. 

One  death  or  others  he  must  choose, 

Either  the  watery  pall 

Or  wounds  and  burial. 

"  My  solemn  robe  then  let  me  don, 
Give  me  high  space  to  stand  upon, 

That  dying  I  may  pour 

A  song  unsung  before." 

It  pleased  them  well  to  grant  this  prayer, 
To  hear  for  naught  how  it  might  fare 

With  men  who  paid  their  gold 

For  what  a  poet  sold. 

In  flowing  stole,  his  eyes  aglow 
With  inward  fire,  he  neared  the  prow 

And  took  his  god-like  stand, 

The  cithara  in  hand. 

The  wolfish  men  all  shrank  aloof, 
And  feared  this  singer  might  be  proof 

Against  their  murderous  power, 

After  his  lyric  hour. 


36o       *0  MAY  I  JOIN  THE  CHOIR  INVISIBLEr 


But  he,  in  liberty  of  song, 

Fearlese  of  death  or  other  wrong, 
With  full  spondaic  toll 
Poured  forth  his  mighty  soul : 

Poured  forth  the  strain  his  dream  had  taught> 
A  home  with  lofty  passion  fraught, 

Such  as  makes  battles  won 

On  fields  of  Marathon. 

The  last  long  vowels  trembled  then 

As  awe  within  those  wolfish  men: 
They  said,  with  mutual  stare 
Some  god  was  present  there. 

But  lo!  Arion  leaped  on  high 
Ready,  his  descant  done,  to  die; 

Not  asking,  "  Is  it  well?*' 

Like  a  pierced  eagle  fell. 
1873. 


«0  MAY  I  JOIN  THE  CHOIR  INVISIBLE." 


Longum  illud  tempus,  quum  non  ero^  magis  me  movet,  quam  ho< 
exiguum — Cicero,  ad  Att.,  xii.  18. 

O  MAY  I  join  the  choir  invisible 

Of  those  immortal  dead,  who  live  again 

In  minds  made  better  by  their  presence:  live 

In  pulses  stirred  to  generosity, 

In  deeds  of  daring  rectitude,  in  scorn 

For  miserable  aims  that  end  with  self, 

In  thoughts  sublime  that  pierce  the  night  like  stars, 

And  with  their  mild  persistence  urge  man's  search 

To  vaster  issues.  '  n 

So  to  live  is  heaven : 
To  make  undying  music  in  the  world, 


**0  MAY  I  JOIN  THE  CHOIR  INVISIBLE," 

Breathing  as  beauteous  order  that  controls 

With  growing  sway  the  growing  Hfe  of  man. 

So  we  inherit  that  sweet  purity 

For  which  we  struggled,  failed,  and  agonized 

With  widening  retrospect  that  bred  despair. 

Rebellious  flesh  that  would  not  be  subdued, 

A  vicious  parent  shaming  still  its  child, 

Poor  anxious  penitence,  is  quick  dissolved; 

Its  discords,  quenched  by  meeting  harmonies, 

Die  in  the  large  and  charitable  air. 

And  all  our  rarer,  better,  truer  self, 

That  sobbed  religiously  in  yearning  song, 

That  watched  to  ease  the  burthen  of  the  world. 

Laboriously  tracing  what  must  be, 

And  what  may  yet  be  better — saw  within 

A  worthier  image  for  the  sanctuary, 

And  shaped  it  forth  before  the  multitude 

Divinely  human,  raising  worship  so 

To  higher  reverence  more  mixed  with  love — 

That  better  self  shall  live  till  human  Time 

Shall  fold  its  eyelids,  and  the  human  sky 

Be  gathered  like  a  scroll  within  the  tomb 

Unread  forever. 

This  is  life  to  come. 
Which  martyred  men  have  made  more  glorious 
For  us  who  strive  to  follow.    May  I  reach 
That  purest  heaven,  be  to  other  souls 
The  cup  of  strength  in  some  great  agony, 
Enkindle  generous  ardor,  feed  pure  love, 
Beget  the  smiles  that  have  no  cruelty- 
Be  the  sweet  presence  of  a  good  diffused, 
And  in  diffusion  ever  more  intense. 
So  shall  I  join  the  choir  invisible 
Whose  music  is  the  gladness  of  the  world. 
1867. 


THE  END 


ESSAYS 


AND 


LEAVES  FROM  A  NOTE-BOOK 


BY 

GEORGE  ELIOT 


AUTHOR  OF  "ROMOLA,"  "  MIDDLEMARCH,"  "ADAM  BEDE,"  ETC. 


\THE  ONLY  LARGE  TYPE  EDITLON. 


NEW  YORK: 

WOETHINGTON  CO. 

Ti?  BROADWAY. 


PREFACE. 


Wishes  have  often  been  expressed  that  the  articles  known  to  have 
been  written  by  George  Eliot  in  the  Westminster  Review  before  she 
had  become  famous  under  that  pseudonym,  should  be  republished. 
Those  wishes  are  now  gratified — as  far,  at  any  rate,  as  it  is  possible  to 
gratify  them.  For  it  was  not  George  Eliot's  desire  that  the  whole  of 
those  articles  should  be  rescued  from  oblivion.  And  in  order 
that  there  might  be  no  doubt  on  the  subject,  she  made,  some  time 
before  her  death,  a  collection  of  such  of  her  fugitive  writings  as  she 
considered  deserving  of  a  permanent  form  ;  carefully  revised  them 
for  the  press ;  and  left  them,  in  the  order  in  which  they  here  appear, 
with  written  injunctions  that  no  other  pieces  written  by  her,  of  date 
prior  to  1857,  should  be  republished. 

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  present  collection  of  Essays  has  the 
weight  of  her  sanction,  and  has  had,  moreover,  the  advantage  of  such 
corrections  and  alterations  as  a  revision  long  subsequent  to  the  period 
of  writing  may  have  suggested  to  her. 

The  opportunity  afforded  by  this  republication  seemed  a  suitable 
one  for  giving  to  the  world  some  "notes,"  as  George  Eliot  simply 
called  them,  which  belonged  to  a  much  later  period,  and  which  have 
not  been  previously  pubhshed.  The  exact  date  of  their  writing  can- 
not be  fixed  with  any  certainty,  but  it  must  have  been  some  time 
between  the  appearance  of  "  Middlemarch  "  and  that  of  "  Theophras- 
tus  Such."  They  were  probably  written  without  any  distinct  view  to 
publication — some  of  them  for  the  satisfaction  of  her  own  mind  ;  others 
perhaps  as  memoranda,  and  with  an  idea  of  working  them  out  more 
fully  at  some  later  time.  It  may  be  of  interest  to  know  that,  besides 
the  "  notes  "  here  given,  the  note-book  contains  four  which  appeared 
in  "Theophrastus  Such,"  three  of  them  practically  as  they  there 
stand ;  and  it  is  not  impossible  that  some  of  those  in  the  present  vol- 
ume might  also  have  been  so  utihzed  had  they  not  happened  to  fall 
outside  the  general  scope  of  the  work. 

I  need  only  add  that,  in  publishing  these  notes,  I  have  the  com- 
plete concurrence  of  my  friend,  Mr.  Cross. 

Charles  Lee  Lewes. 

HiGHGATE,  December,  1883. 


CONTENTS 


ESSAYS. 

PAGE. 

I.  WORIvDLINESS  AND  OTHE^R-WoRI^DIvINESS  :    ThE  PORT 


Young,   5 

(Westminster  Review,  1857.) 

II.  German  Wit:  Hkinrich  Heine,  'Si 

( Westminster  Review,  1856,) 


III.  Evangelical  Teaching:  Dr.  Gumming,   ....  86 

(Westminster  Review,  1855.) 

IV.  The  Influence  of  Rationalism  :  I^ecky's  History,  115 

(Fortnightly  Review,  1865.) 

V.  The  Natural  History  of  German  I^ife:  Riehl,  130 

(Westminster  Review,  1856.) 

VI.  Three  Months  in  Weimar,  163 

(Fraser's  Magazine,  1855.) 

VII.  Address  to  Working  Men,  by  Felix  Holt,  .  .  .  i8o 

(Blackwood's  Magazine,  1868.) 


LEAVES  FROM  A  NOTE-BOOK. 


Authorship,  •   .   .  195 

Judgments  on  Authors,  200 

Story-Telling,  202 

Historic  Imagination,  204 

Value  in  Originality,  205 

To  THE  Prosaic  All  Things  are  Prosaic,  206 

"Dear  Religious  lyOVE,"  206 

We  Make  Our  Own  Precedents,   207 

Birth  of  Tolerance,   207 

Felix  Qui  Non  Potuit,  218 

Divine  Grace  a  Real  Emanation,    ........  218 

"A  Fine  Excess"  Feeling  is  Energy,   .   .   »  •  «  •  2x8 


WORLDLINESS  AND  OTHER  WQRLDLINESS: 
THE  POET  YOUNG. 


The  study  of  men,  as  they  have  appeared  in  different 
ages,  and  under  various  social  conditions,  may  be  consid- 
ered as  the  natural  history  of  the  race.  Let  us,  then,  for 
a  moment  imagine  ourselves,  as  students  of  this  natural 
history,  "dredging"  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth  century 
in  search  of  specimens.  About  the  year  1730  we  have 
hauled  up  a  remarkable  individual  of  the  species  divine — a 
surprising  name,  considering  the  nature  of  the  animal 
before  us ;  but  we  are  used  to  unsuitable  names  in  natural 
history.  Let  us  examine  this  individual  at  our  leisure.  He  is 
on  the  verge  of  fifty,  and  has  recently  undergone  his 
metamorphosis  into  the  clerical  form.  Rather  a  para- 
doxical specimen,  if  you  observe  him  narrowly;  a  sort 
of  cross  between  a  sycophant  and  a  psalmist;  a  poet  whose 
imagination  is  alternately  fired  by  the  "Last  Day"  and  by 
a  creation  of  peers,  who  fluctuates  between  rhapsodic 
applause  of  King  George  and  rhapsodic  applause  of  Jeho- 
vah. After  spending  "a  foolish  youth,  the  sport  of  peers 
and  poets,"  after  being  a  hanger-on  of  the  profligate  Duke 
of  Wharton,  after  aiming  iri  vain  at  a  Parliamentary  career, 
and  angling  for  pensions  and  preferment  with  fulsome  dedi- 
cations and  fustian  odes,  he  is  a  little  disgusted  with  his 
imperfect  success,  and  has  determined  to  retire  from  the 
general  medicancy  business  to  a  particular  branch ;  in  other 
words,  he  has  determined  on  that  renunciation  of  the  world 
implied  in  "taking  orders,"  with  the  prospect  of  a  good 
living  and  an  advantageous  matrimonial  connection.  And 
he  personifies  the  nicest  balance  of  temporalities  and  spirit- 
ualities. He  is  equally  impressed  with  the  momentousness 
of  death  and  of  burial  fees ;  he  languishes  at  once  for  immor- 
tal life  and  for  "livings;"  he  has  a  fervid  attachment  to 
patrons  in  general,  but,  on  the  whole,  prefers  the  Almighty. 
He  will  teach,  with  something  more  than  official  conviction, 

5 


6       WORLDLINESS  AND  OTHER  WORLDLINESS: 


the  nothingness  of  earthly  things ;  and  he  will  feel  something 
more  than  private  disgust  if  his  meritorious  efforts  in  direct- 
ing men's  attention  to  another  world  are  not  rewarded  by 
substantial  preferment  in  this.  His  secular  man  believes  in 
cambric  bands  and  silk  stockings  as  characteristic  attire  for 
"an  ornament  of  religion  and  virtue;"  hopes  courtiers  will 
never  forget  to  copy  Sir  Robert  Walpole ;  and  writes  beg- 
ging-letters to  the  King's  mistress.  His  spiritual  man 
recognizes  no  motives  more  familiar  than  Golgotha  and 
"the  skies;"  it  walks  in  graveyards,  or  it  soars  among  the 
stars.  His  religion  exhausts  itself  in  ejaculations  and 
rebukes,  and  knows  no  medium  between  the  ecstatic  and 
the  sententious.  If  it  were  not  for  the  prospect  of  immor- 
tality, he  considers,  it  would  be  wise  and  agreeable  to  be 
indecent,  or  to -murder  one's  father;  and,  heaven  apart,  it 
would  be  extremely  irrational  in  any  man  not  to  be  a  knave. 
Man,  he  thinks,  is  a  compound  of  the  angel  and  the  brute : 
the  brute  is  to  be  humbled  by  being  reminded  of  its  "  rela- 
tion to  the  stalls,"  and  frightened  into  moderation  by  the 
contemplation  of  deathbeds  and  skulls;  the  angel  is  to  be 
developed  by  vituperating  this  world  and  exalting  the  next; 
and  by  this  double  process  you  get  the  Christian — '<the 
highest  style  of  man."  With  all  this,  our  new-made  divine 
is  an  unmistakable  poet.  To  a  clay  compounded  chiefly  of 
the  worldling  and  the  rhetorician,  there  is  added  a  real  spark 
of  Promethean  fire.  He  will  one  day  clothe  his  apostrophes 
and  objurgations,  his  astronomical  religion  and  his  charnel- 
house  morality,  in  lasting  verse,  which  will  stand,  like  a 
Juggernaut  made  of  gold  and  jewels,  at  once  magnificent 
and  repulsive :  for  this  divine  is  Edward  Young,  the  future 
author  of  the    Night  Thoughts." 

Judging  from  Young's  works,  one  might  imagine  that  the 
preacher  had  been  organized  in  him  by  hereditary  transmis- 
sion through  a  long  line  of  clerical  forefathers, — that  the 
diamonds  of  the  ''Night  Thoughts"  had  been  slowly  con- 
densed from  the  charcoal  of  ancestrial  sermons.  Yet  it  was 
not  so.  His  grandfather,  apparently,  wrote  himself  gentle- 
man, not  clerk ;  and  there  is  no  evidence  that  preaching  had 
run  in  the  family  blood  before  it  took  that  turn  in  the  per- 
son of  the  poet's  father,  who  was  quadruply  clerical,  being  at 
once  rector,  prebendary,  court  chaplain,  and  dean.  Young 
was  born  at  his  father's  rectory  of  Uphani;  in  1681.    In  due 


THE  POET  YOUNG, 


7 


time  the  boy  went  to  Winchester  College,  and  subsequently, 
though  not  till  he  was  twenty-two,  to  Oxford,  where,  for 
his  father's  sake,  he  was  befriended  by  the  wardens  of  two 
colleges,  and  in  i/oS,  three  years  after  his  father's  deaths 
nominated  by  Archbishop  Tenison  to  a  law  fellowship  at 
All  Souls.  Of  Young's  life  at  Oxford,  in  these  years,  hardly 
anything  is  knowii.  His  biographer.  Croft,  has  nothing  to 
tell  us  but  the  vague  report  that,  when  Young  found  him- 
self independent  and  his  own  master  at  All  Souls,  he  was 
not  the  ornament  to  religion  and  morality  that  he  afterwards 
became,"  and  the  perhaps  apocryphal  anecdote,  that  Tindal, 
the  atheist,  confessed  himself  embarrassed  by  the  originality 
of  Young's  arguments.  Both  the  report  and  the  anecdote, 
however,  are  borne  out  by  indirect  evidence.  As  to  the 
latter.  Young  has  left  us  sufficient  proof  that  he  was  fond 
of  arguing  on  the  theological  side,  and  that  he  had  his  own 
way  of  treating  old  subjects.  As  to  the  former,  we  "learn 
that  Pope,  after  saying  other  things  which  we  know  to  be 
true  of  Young,  added,  that  he  passed  "  a  foolish  youth,  the 
sport  of  peers  and  poets;"  and,  from  all  the  indications  we 
possess  of  his  career  till  he  was  nearly  fifty,  we  are  inclined 
to  think  that  Pope's  statement  only  errs  by  defect,  and  that 
he  should  rather  have  said,  a  foolish  youth  and  middle  age!' 
It  is  not  likely  that  Young  was  a  very  hard  student,  for  he 
impressed  Johnson,  who  saw  him  in  his  old  age,  as  ''not  a 
great  scholar,"  and  as  surprisingly  ignorant  of  what  Johnson 
thought  "quite  common  maxims"  in  literature;  and  there  is 
no  evidence  that  he  filled  either  his  leisure  or  his  purse  by 
taking  pupils.  His  career  as  an  author  did  not  begin  till  he 
was  nearly  thirty,  even  dating  from  the  publication  of  a  por- 
tion of  the  "Last  Day"  in  the  Tatler ;  so  that  he  could 
hardly  have  been  absorbed  in  composition.  But  where  the 
fully  developed  insect  is  parasitic,  we  believe  the  larva  is 
usually  parasitic  also,  and  we  shall  probably  not  be  far  wrong 
in  supposing  that  Young  at  Oxford,  as  elsewhere,  spent  a 
good  deal  of  his  time  in  hanging  about  possible  and  actual 
patrons,  and  accommodating  himself  to  their  habits  with 
considerable  flexibility  of  conscience  and  -of  tongue ;  being 
none  the  less  ready,  upon  occasion,  to  present  himself  as 
the  champion  of  theology,  and  to  rhapsodize  at  convenient 
moments  in  the  company  of  the  skies  or  of  skulls.  That 
brilliant  profligate,  the  Duke  of  Wharton,  to  whom  Young 


8        WORLDLINESS  AND  OTHER  WORLDLINESS: 


afterwards  clung  as  his  chief  patron,  was  at  this  time  a  mere 
boy;  and,  though  it  is  probable  that  their  intimacy  had 
already  begun,  since  the  Duke's  father  and  mother  were 
friends  of  the  old  Dean,  that  intimacy  ought  not  to  aggra- 
vate any  unfavorable  inference  as  to  Young's  Oxford  life. 
It  is  less  likely  that  he  fell  into  any  exceptional  vice,  than 
that  he  differed  from  the  men  around  him  chiefly  in  his 
episodes  of  theological  advocacy  and  rhapsodic  solemnity. 
He  probably  sowed  his  wild  oats  after  the  coarse  fashion  of 
his  times,  for  he  has  left  us  sufficient  evidence  that  his  moral 
sense  was  not  delicate;  but  his  companions,  who  where 
occupied  in  sowing  their  own  oats,  perhaps  took  it  as  a 
matter  of  course  that  he  should  be  a  rake,  and  were  only 
struck  with  the  exceptional  circumstance  that  he  was  a  pious 
and  moralizing  rake. 

There  is  some  irony  in  the  fact  that  the  two  first  poetical 
productions  of  Young,  published  in  the  same  year,  were  his 
Epistle  to  Lord  Lansdowne,"  celebrating  the  recent  creation 
of  peers — Lord  Lansdowne's  creation,  in  particular — and  the 
"Last  Day."  Other  poets,  besides  Young,  found  the  device 
for  obtaining  a  Tory  majority  by  turning  twelve  insignificant 
commoners  into  insignificant  lords,  an  irresistible  stimulus 
to  verse;  but  no  other  poet  showed  so  versatile  an  enthu- 
siasm, so  nearly  equal  an  ardor  for  the  honor  of  the  new 
baron  and  the  honor  of  the  Diety  But  the  two-fold  nature  of 
the  sycophant  and  the  psalmist  is  not  more  strikingly  shown 
in  the  contrasted  themes  of  the  two  poems,  than  in  the 
transitions  from  bombast  about  monarchs  to  bombast  about 
the  resurrection,  in  the  ''Last  Day"  itself  The  dedication 
of  this  poem  to  Queen  Anne,  Young  afterwards  suppressed, 
for  he  was  always  ashamed  of  having  flattered  a  dead  patron. 
In  this  dedication,  Croft  tells  us,  ''he  gives  her  Majesty 
praise  indeed  for  her  victories,  but  says  that  the  author  is 
more  pleased  to  see  her  rise  from  this  lower  world,  soaring 
above  the  clouds,  passing  the  first  and  second  heavens,  and 
leaving  the  fixed  stars  behind  her ;  nor  will  he  lose  her  there, 
he  says,  but  keep  her  still  in  view  through  the  boundless 
spaces  on  the  other  side  of  creation,  in  her  journey  towards 
eternal  bliss,  till  he  behold  the  heaven  of  heavens  open,  and 
angels  receiving  and  conveying  her  still  onward  from  the 
stretch  of  his  imagination,  which  tires  in  her  pursuit,  and 
falls  back  again  to  earth." 


THE  POET  YOUNG. 


9 


The  self-criticism  which  prompted  the  suppresssion  of  the  * 
dedication  did  not,  however,  lead  him  to  improve  either  the 
rhyme  or  the  reason  of  the  unfortunate  couplet: 

*' When  other  Bourbons  reign  in  other  lands, 
And,  if  men's  sins  forbid  not,  other  Annes.'* 

In  the  "Epistle  to  Lord  Lansdowne"  Young  indicates  his 
taste  for  the  drama ;  and  there  is  evidence  that  his  tragedy 
of  "Busiris"  was  "in  the  theatre"  as  early  as  this  very  year 
1 71 3,  though  it  was  not  brought  on  the  stage  till  nearly  six 
years  later ;  so  that  Young  was  now  very  decidedly  bent  on 
authorship,  for  which  his  degree  of  B.  C.  L.,  taken  in  this 
year,  was  doubtless  a  magical  equipment.  Another  poem, 
"The  Force  of  Religion;  or,  Vanquished  Love,"  founded  on 
the  execution  of  Lady  Jane  Grey  and  her  husband,  quickly 
followed,  showing  fertility  in  feeble  and  tasteless  verse ;  and 
on  the  Queen's  death,  in  17 14,  Young  lost  no  time  in  mak- 
ing a  poetical  lament  for  a  departed  patron  a  vehicle  for 
extravagant  laudation  of  the  new  monarch.  No  further  lit- 
erary Production  of  his  appeared  until  17 16,  when  a  Latin 
oration  which  he  delivered,  on  the  foundation  of  the  Cod- 
rington  Library  at  All  Souls,  gave  him  a  new  opportunity^ 
for  displaying  his  alacrity  in  inflated  panegyric. 

In  171 7  it  is  probable  that  Young  accompanied  the  Duke 
of  Wharton  to  Ireland,  though  so  slender  are  the  materials 
for  his  biography,  that  the  chief  basis  for  this  supposition  is 
a  passage  in  his  "Conjectures  on  Original  Composition,"  • 
written  when  he  was  nearly  eighty,  in  which  he  intimates 
that  he  had  once  been  in  that  country.  But  there  are 
many  facts  surviving  to  indicate  that  for  the  next  eight  or 
nine  years  Young  was  a  sort  of  attache  of  Wharton's.  In 
1 7 19,  according  to  legal  records,  the  Duke  granted  him  an 
annuity,  in  consideration  of  his  having  relinquished  the  office 
of  tutor  to  Lord  Burleigh,  with  a  life  annuity  of  £\QO  a 
year,  on  his  Grace's  assurances  that  he  would  provide  for 
him  in  a  much  more  ample  manner.  And  again,  from  the 
same  evidence,  it  appears  that  in  1721  Young  received  from 
Wharton  a  bond  for  ;^6oo,  in  compensation  of  expenses 
incurred  in  standing  for  Parliament  at  the  Duke's  desire, 
and  as  an  earnest  of  greater  services  which  his  Grace  had 
promised  him  on  his  refraining  from  the  spiritual  and  tern- 


lo      WORLDLINESS  AND  OTHER  WORLDLINESS: 


poral  advantages  of  taking  orders  with  a  certainty  of  two 
livings  in  the  gift  of  his  college.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that 
lay  advancement  as  long  as  there  was  any  chance  of  it,  had 
more  attractions  for  Young  than  clerical  prefprment ;  and 
that  at  this  time  he  accepted  the  Duke  of  Wharton  as  the 
pilot  of  his  career. 

A  more  creditable  relation  of  Young's  was  his  friend- 
ship with  Tickell,  with  whom  he  was  in  the  habit  of  inter- 
changing criticisms,  and  to  whom,  in  17 19 — the  same  year 
let  us  note,  in  which  he  took  his  doctor's  degree — he 
addressed  his  "Lines  on  the  Death  of  Addison."  Close 
upon  these  followed  his  "Paraphrase  of  Part  of  the  Book 
of  Job,"  with  a  dedication  to  Parker,  recently  made  Lord 
Chancellor,  showing  that  the  possession  of  Wharton's 
patronage  did  not  prevent  Young  from  fishing  in  other 
waters.  He  knew  nothing  of  Parker,  but  that  did  not 
prvent  him  from  magnifying  the  new  Chancellor's  merits; 
on  the  other  hand,  he  did  know  Wharton,  but  this  again 
did  not  prevent  him  from  prefixing  to  his  tragedy,  "The 
Revenge,"  which  appeared  in  1 721,  a  dedication  attri- 
buting to  the  Duke  all  virtues,  as  well  as  all  accomplish- 
ments. In  the  concluding  sentence  of  this  dedication. 
Young  naively  indicates  thet  a  considerable  ingredient  in 
his  gratitude  was  a  lively  sense  of  anticipated  favors.  "  My 
present  fortune  ishis  bounty,  and  my  future  his  care;  which 
I  will  venture  to  say  will  always  be  remembered  to  his 
honor;  since  he,  I  know,  intended  his  generosity  as  an 
encouragement  to  merit,  though,  through  his  very  par- 
donble  partiality  to  one  who  bears  him  so  sincere  a 
duty  and  respect,  I  happened  to  receive  the  benefit  of 
it."  Young  was  economical  with  his  ideas  and  images; 
he  was  rarely  satisfied  with  using  a.  clever  thing  once, 
and  this  bit  of  ingenious  humility  was  afterwards  made 
to  do  duty  in  the  "Instalment,"  a  poem  addressed  to 
Walpole : 

"  Be  this  thy  partial  smile,  from  censure  free, 
'Twas  meant  for  merit,  though  it  fell  on  me." 

It  was  probably  "The  Revenge"  that  Young  was  writing 
when,  as  we  learn  from  Spence's  anecdotes,  the  Duke  of 
Wharton  gave  him  a  skull  with  a  candle  fixed  in  it,  as  the 


THE  POET  YOUNG. 


II 


most  appropriate  lamp  by  which  to  write  tragedy.  Accord- 
ing to  Young's  dedication,  the  Duke  was  ''accessory  "  to  the 
scenes  of  this  tragedy  in  a  more  important  way,  ''  not  only 
by  suggesting  the  most  beautiful  incident  in  them,  but  by 
making  all  possible  provision  for  the  success  of  the  whole." 
A  statement  which  is  credible,  not  indeed  on  the  ground  of 
Young's  dedicatory  assertion,  but  from  the  known  ability  of 
the  Duke,  who,  as  Pope  tells  us,  possessed 

"  each  gift  of  Nature  afid  of  Art, 
And  wanted  nothing  but  an  honest  heart.  * ' 

The  year  1722  seems  to  have  been  the  period  of  a  visit 
to  Mr.  Dodington,  at  Eastbury,  in  Dorsetshire — the  "pure 
Dorsetian  downs"  celebrated  by  Thomson — in  which 
Young  made  the  acquaintance  of  Voltaire ;  for  in  the  subse- 
quent dedication  of  his  "Sea  Piece"  to  "Mr.  Voltaire,"  he 
recalls  their  meeting  on  Dorset  Downs ;  and  it  was  in 
this  year  that  Christopher  Pitt,  a  gentleman-poet  of  those 
days,  addressed  an  "Epistle  to  Dr.  Edward  Young,  at 
Eastbury,  in  Dorsetshire,"  which  has  at  least  the  merit 
of  this  biographical  couplet: 

"  While  with  your  Dodington  retired  you  sit 
Charm'd  with  his  flowing  Burgundy  and  wit.  " 

Dodington,  apparently,  was  charmed  in  his  turn,  for  he 
told  Dr.  Wharton  that  Young  was  "far  superior  to  the 
French  poet  in  the  variety  and  novelty  of  his  bon-mots  and 
repartees."  Unfortunately,  the  only  specimen  of  Young's 
wit  on  this  occasion  that  has  been  preserved  to  us  is 
the  epigram  represented  as  an  extempore  retort  (spoken 
aside,  surely)  to  Voltaire's  criticism  of  Milton's  episode 
of  Sin  and  Death: 

"Thou  art  so  witty,  profligate,  and  thin, 
At  once  we  think  thee  Milton,  Death,  and  Sin  ;  " — 

an  epigram  which,  in  the  absence  of  "flowing  Burgundy," 
does  not  strike  us  as  remarkably  brilliant.  Let  us  give 
Young  the  benefit  of  the  doubt  thrown  on  the  genuineness 
of  this  epigram  by  his  own  poetical  dedication,  in  which  he 
represents  himself  as  having  "soothed"  Voltaire's  "rage" 


12      WORLDLINESS  AND  OTHER  WORLDLINESS: 


against  Milton  "with  gentle  rhymes;"  though  in  other 
respects  that  dedication  is  anything  but  favorable  to  a 
high  estimate  of  Young's  wit.  Other  evidence  apart,  we 
should  not  be  eager  for  the  after-dinner  conversation  of 
the  man  who  wrote, 

"  Thine  is  the  Drama,  how  renown' d  ! 
Thine  Epic's  loftier  trump  to  sound; — 
But  let  AriorC s  sea-strung  harp  be  mine  : 
But  where  s  his  dolphin  ?    Knoiv  st  thou  where  f 
May  that  be  found  in  thee,  Voltaire  !  " 

The  "Satires"  appeared  in  1725  and  1726,  each,  of 
course,  with  its  laudatory  dedication  and  its  compliments 
insinuated  among  the  rhymes.  The  seventh  and  last  is 
dedicated  to  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  is  very  short,  and  con- 
tains nothing  in  particular  except  lunatic  flattery  of  George 
I.  and  his  prime  minister,  attributing  that  monarch's  late 
escape  from  a  storm  at  sea  to  the  miraculous  influence 
of  his  grand  and  virtuous  soul — for  George,  he  says,  rivals 
the  angels : 

"George,  who  in  foes  can  soft  affections  raise, 
And  charm  envenomed  satire  into  praise. 
Nor  human  rage  alone  his  pow'r  perceives, 
But  the  mad  winds  and  the  tumultuous  waves. 
Ev'n  storms  (Death's  fiercest  ministers!)  forbear. 
And  in  their  own  wild  empire  learn  to  spare. 
Thus,  Nature's  self,  supporting  Man's  decree, 
Styles  Britain's  sovereign,  sovereign  of  the  sea." 

As  for  Walpole,  what  he  felt  at  this  tremenduous  crisis 

"No  powers  of  language,  but  his  own,  can  tell, — 
His  own,  which  Nature  and  the  Graces  form. 
At  will,  to  raise,  or  hush,  the  civil  storm." 

It  is  a  coincidence  worth  noticing,  that  this  seventh  Satire 
was  published  in  1726,  and  that  the  warrant  of  George  I., 
granting  Young  a  pension  of  ;£"20o  a  year  from  Lady-day, 
1725,  is  dated  May  3,  1726.  The  gratitude  exhibited  in  this 
Satire  may  have  been  chiefly  prospective,  but  the  "Instalment" 
— a  poem  inspired  by  the  thrilling  event  of  Walpole's  instal- 
lation as  Knight  of  the  Garter — was  clearly  written  with  the 
double  ardor  of  a  man  who  has  got  a  pension,  and  hopes  for 


THE  POET  YOUNG. 


13 


something  more.  His  emotion  about  Walpole  is  precisely  at 
the  same  pitch  as  his  subsequent  emotion  about  the  Second 
Advent.    In  the  "Instalment"  he  says: 

"With  invocations  some  their  hearts  inflame; 
I  need  no  muse,  a  Walpole  is  my  theme.'' 

And  of  God  coming  to  judgment,  he  says,  in  the  "Night 
Thoughts:" 

"  I  find  my  inspiration  in  my  theme ; 
The  grandeur  of  my  subject  is  my  muse,'' 

Nothing  can  be  feebler  than  this  "Instalment,  "except  in 
the  strength  of  impudence  with  which  the  writer  professes  to 
scorn  the  prostitution  of  fair  fame,  the  "profanation  of  Celes- 
tial fire." 

Herbert  Croft  tells  us  that  Young  made  more  than  three 
thousand  pounds  by  his  "Satires" — a  surprising  statement 
taken  in  connection  with  the  reasonable  doubt  he  throws  on 
the  story  related  in  Spence's  "Anecdotes,"  that  the  Duke  of 
Wharton  gave  Young  ;^2000  for  this  work.  Young,  how- 
ever, seems  to  have  been  tolerably  fortunate  in  the  pecuniary 
results  of  his  publications ;  and  with  his  literary  profits,  his 
annuity  from  Wharton,  his  fellowship,  and  his  pension,  not 
to  mention  other  bounties  which  may  be  inferred  from  the 
high  merits  he  discovers  in  many  men  of  wealth  and 
position,  we  may  fairly  suppose  that  he  now  laid  the  founda- 
tion of  the  considerable  fortune  he  left  at  his  death. 

It  is  probable  that  the  Duke  of  Wharton's  final  departure 
for  the  Continent  and  disgrace  at  Court  in  1726,  and  the 
consequent  cessation  of  Young's  reliance  on  his  patronage, 
tended  not  only  to  heighten  the  temperature  of  his  poetical 
enthusiasm  for  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  but  also  to  turn  his 
thoughts  towards  the  Church  again,  as  the  second-best 
means  of  rising  in  the  world.  On  the  accession  of  Geoi'ge 
II.,  Young  found  the  same  transcendent  merits  in  him  as  in  his 
predecessor,  and  celebrated  them  in  a  style  of  poetry  pre- 
viously unattempted  by  him — the  Pindaric  ode,  a  poetic  form 
which  helped  him  to  surpass  himself  in  furious  bombast. 
"Ocean,  an  Ode:  concluding  with  a  wish,"  was  the  title  of 
this  piece.  He  afterwards  pruned  it,  and  cut  off,  among 
other  things,  the  concluding  Wish,  expressing  the  yearning 


14       WORLDLINESS  AND  OTHER  WORLDLINESS: 


for  humble  retirement,  which,  of  course,  had  prompted  him 
to  the  effusion ;  but  we  may  judge  of  the  rejected  stanzas  by 
the  quality  of  those  he  has  allowed  to  remain.  For  example, 
calling  on  Britain's  dead  mariners  to  rise  and  meet  their 
"country's  full-blown  glory"  in  the  person  of  the  new  King, 
he  says : 

"  What  powerful  charm 

Can  death  disarm? 
Your  long,  your  iron  slumbers  break  ? 

By  Jove,  by  Fmne, 

By  George's  name 
Awake !  awake !  awake  !  awake ! ' ' 

Soon  after  this  notable  production,  which  was  written 
with  the  ripe  folly  of  forty-seven,  Young  took  orders,  and 
was  presently  appointed  chaplain  to  the  King.  "The  Broth- 
ers," his  third  and  last  tragedy,  which  was  already  in  rehear- 
sal, he  now  withdrew  from  the  stage,  and  sought  reputation 
in  a  way  more  accordant  with  the  decorum  of  his  new  pro- 
fession, by  turning  prose-writer.  But  after  publishing  "A 
True  Estimate  of  Human  Life,"  with  a  dedication  to  the 
Queen,  as  one  of  the  "most  shining  representatives"  of 
God  on  earth,  and  a  sermon,  entitled  "An  Apology  for 
Princes;  or,  the  Reverence  due  to  Government,"  preached 
before  the  House  of  Commons,  his  Pindaric  ambition  again 
seized  him,  and  he  matched  his  former  ode  by  another, 
called  "Imperium  Pelagi;  a  Naval  Lyric,  written  in  Imi- 
tation of  Pindar's  Spirit,  occasioned  by  his  Majesty's 
Return  from  Hanover,  1729,  and  the  succeeding  Peace." 
Since  he  afterwards .  suppressed  this  second  ode,  we  must 
suppose  that  it  was  rather  worse  than  the  first.  Next  came 
his  two  "Epistles  to  Pope,  concerning  the  Authors  of 
the  Age,"  remarkable  for  nothing  but  the  audacity  of 
affectation  with  which  the  most  servile  of  poets  professes  to 
despise  servility. 

In  1730,  Young  was  presented  by  his  college  with  the 
rectory  of  Welwyn,  in  Hertfordshire;  and  in  the  following 
year,  when  he  was  just  fifty,  he  married  Lady  Elizabeth  Lee, 
a  widow  with  two  children,  who  seems  to  have  been  in  favor 
with  Queen  Caroline,  and  who  probably  had  an  income — 
two  attractions  which  doubtless  enhanced  the  power  of  her 
other  charms.    Pastoral  duties  and  domesticity  probably 


THE  POET  YOUNG. 


15 


cured  Young  of  some  bad  habits ;  but,  unhappily,  they  did 
not  cure  him  either  of  flattery  or  of  fustian.  Three  more 
odes  followed,  quite  as  bad  as  those  of  his  bachelorhood, 
except  that  in  the  third  he  announced  the  wise  resolution 
of  never  writing  another.  It  must  have  been  about  this 
time,  since  Young  was  now  turned  of  fifty,"  that  he  wrote 
the  letter  to  Mrs.  Howard  (afterwards  Lady  Suffolk),  George 
II. 's  mistress,  which  proves  that  he  used  other  engines, 
besides  the  Pindaric,  in  "besieging  Court  favor."  The  letter 
is  too  characteristic  to  be  omitted: 


"Madam, — I  know  his  majesty's  goodness  to  his  servants,  and  his 
love  of  justice  in  general,  so  well,  that  I  am  confident,  if  his  majesty 
knew  my  case,  I  should  not  have  any  cause  to  despair  of  his  gracious 
favor  to  me. 


These,  madam,  are  the  proper  points  of  consideration  in  the. person 
that  humbly  hopes  his  majesty's  favor. 

"  As  to  Abilities,  all  I  can  presume  to  say  is,  I  have  done  the  best  • 
I  could  to  improve  them. 

"As  to  Good  Manners,  I  desire  no  favor,  if  any  just  objection  lies 
against  them. 

"  As  for  Service,  I  have  been  near  seven  years  in  his  majesty's,  and 
never  omitted  any  duty  in  it,  which  few  can  say. 

•*  As  for  Age,  I  am  turned  of  fifty. 

"As  for  Want,  I  have  no  manner  of  preferment. 

"As  for  Sufferings,  I  have  lost  ^300  per  ann.  by  being  in  his  maj- 
esty's service;  as  I  have  shown  in  a  Representation  which  his  majesty 
has  been  so  good  as  to  read  and  consider. 

"As  for  Zeal,  I  have  written  nothing  without  showing  my  duty  to 
their  majesties,  and  some  pieces  are  dedicated  to  them. 

"This,  madam,  is  the  short  and  true  state  of  my  case.  They  that 
make  their  court  to  the  ministers,  and  not  their  majesties,  succeed 
better.  If  my  case  deserves  some  consideration,  and  you  can  serve 
me  in  it,  I  humbly  hope  and  believe  you  will :  I  shall,  therefore, 
trouble  you  no  farther ;  but  beg  leave  to  subscribe  myself,  with  truest 
respect  and  gratitude,  yours,  etc., 


"P.  S. — I  have  some  hope  that  my  Lord  Townshend  is  my  friend; 
if  therefore  soon,  and  before  he  leaves  the  court,  you  had  an  oppor- 
tunity of  mentioning  me,  with  that  favor  you  have  been  so  good  to 
show,  I  think  it  would  not  fail  of  success ;  and,  if  not,  I  shall  owe  you 
more  than  any." — Suffolk  Letters,  vol.  i.,  p.  285. 


"  Monday  Morning. 


"  Abilities. 
Good  Manners. 
Service. 
Age. 


Want. 

Sufferings 

and 
Zeal 


Edward  Young. 


16     WORLDUNESS  ANJO  OTHER  WORLDLINESS: 


Young's  wife  died  in  1741,  leaving  him  one  son,  born  in 
1733.  That  he  had  attached  himself  strongly  to  her  two 
daughters  by  her  former  marriage,  there  is  better  evidence 
in  the  report,  mentioned  by  Mrs.  Montagu,  of  his  practical 
kindness  and  liberality  to  the  younger,  than  in  his  lamen- 
tations over  the  elder  as  the  "Narcissa"  of  the  the  "Night 
Thoughts."  ''Narcissa"  had  died  in  1735,  shortly  after 
marriage  to  Mr.  Temple,  the  son  of  Lord  Palmerston ;  and 
Mr.  Tempie  himself,  after  a  second  marriage,  died  in  1740, 
a  year  before  Lady  Elizabeth  Young.  These,  then,  are  the 
three  deaths  supposed  to  have  inspired  "The  Complaint," 
which  forms  the  three  first  books  of  the    Night  Thoughts 

"  Insatiate  archer,  could  not  one  suffice? 

Thy  shaft  flew  thrice  ;  and  thrice  my  peace  was  slain ; 

And  thrice,  ere  thrice  yon  moon  had  filled  her  horn." 

Since  we  find  Young  departing  from  the  truth  of  dates,  in 
order  to  heighten  the  effect  of  his  calamity,  or  at  least  of  his 
chmax,  we  need  not  be  surprised  that  he  allowed  his  imagi- 
nation great  freedom  in  other  matters  besides  chronology, 
and  that  the  character  of  "  Philander"  can,  by  no  process, 
be  made  to  fit  Mr.  Temple,  The  supposition  that  the  much- 
lectured  "Lorenzo"  of  the  "Night  Thoughts"  was  Young's 
own  son  is  hardly  rendered  more  absurd  by  the  fact  that  the 
poem  was  written  when  that  son  was  a  boy,  than  by  the 
obvious  artificiality  of  the  characters  Young  introduces  as 
targets  for  his  arguments  and  rebukes.  Among  all  the  tri- 
vial efforts  of  conjectural  criticism,  there  can  hardly  be  one 
more  futile  than  the  attempt  to  discover  the  original  of  those 
pitiable  lay-figures,  the  "Lorenzos"  and  "Altamonts"  of 
Young's  didactic  prose  and  poetry.  His  muse  never  stood 
face  to  face  with  a  genuine,  living  human  being ;  she  would 
have  been  as  much  startled  by  such  an  encounter  as  a  stage 
necromancer  whose  incantations  and  blue  fire  had  actually 
conjured  up  a  demon. 

The  "Night  Thoughts"  appeared  between  1741  and  1745. 
Although  he  declares  in  them  that  he  has  chosen  God  for 
his  "  patron"  henceforth,  this  is  not  at  all  to  the  prej^adice  of 
some  half-dozen  lords,  duchesses,  and  right  honorables,  who 
have  the  privilege  of  sharing  finely  turned  compliments  with 
their  co-patron.  The  line  which  closed  the  Second  Night 
in  the  earher  editions: 


THE  POET  YOUNG. 


17 


"Wits  spare  not  Heaven,  O  Wilmington  ! — nor  thee" — 

is  an  intense  specimen  of  that  perilous  juxtaposition  of  ideas 
by  which  Young,'  in  his  incessant  search  after  point  and 
novelty,  unconsciously  converts  his  compliments  into  sar- 
casms; and  his  apostrophe  to  the  moon,  as  more  likely  to 
be  favorable  to  his  song  if  he  calls  her  "  fair  Portland  of  the 
skies,"  is  worthy  even  of  his  Pindaric  ravings.  His  osten- 
tatious renunciation  of  worldly  schemes,  and  especially  of 
his  twenty  year's  siege  of  Court  favor,  are  in  the  tone  of  one 
who  retains  some  hope,  in  the  midst  of  his  querulousness. 

He  descended  from  the  astronomical  rhapsodies  of  his 
Ninth  Night,  published  in  1745,  to  more  terrestrial  strains, 
in  his  ''Reflections  on  the  Public  Situation  of  the  Kingdom," 
dedicated  to  the  Duke  of  Newcastle;  but  in  this  critical  year 
we  get  a  glimpse  of  him  through  a  more  prosaic  and  less 
refracting  medium.  He  spent  a  part  of  the  year  at  Tunbridge 
Wells;  and  Mrs.  Montagu,  who  who  was  there  too,  gives  a 
very  lively  picture  of  the  "  divine  Doctor"  in  her  letters  to 
the  Duchess  of  Portland,  on  whom  Young  had  bestowed  the 
superlative  bombast  to  which  we  have  just  referred.  We 
shall  borrow  the  quotations  from  Dr.  Doran,  in  spite  of  their 
length,  because,  to  our  mind,  they  present  the  most  agree- 
able portrait  we  possess  of  Young : 

"  '  I  have  great  joy  in  Dr.  Young,  whom  I  disturbed  in  a  revery. 
At  first  he  started,  then  bowed,  then  fell  back  into  a  surprise  ;  then 
began  a  speech,  relapsed  into  his  astonishment  two  or  three  times,  for- 
got what  he  had  been  saying  ;  began  a  new  subject,  and  so  went  on. 
I  told  him  your  grace  desired  he  would  write  longer  letters  ;  to  which 
he  cried  "  Ha  !  "  most  emphatically,  and  I  leave  you  to  interpret  what 
it  meant.  He  has  made  a  friendship  with  one  person  here,  whom  I 
believe  you  would  not  imagine  to  have  been  made  for  his  bosom 
friend.  You  would,  perhaps,  suppose  it  was  a  bishop  or  dean,  a  pre- 
bend, a  pious  preacher,  a  clergyman  of  exemplary  life,  or,  if  a  layman, 
of  most  virtuous  conversation,  one  that  had  paraphrased  St.  Matthew, 
or  wrote  comments  on  St.  Paul.  .  .  .  You  would  not  guess  that  this  as- 
sociate of  the  doctor's  was — old  Gibber  !  Certainly,  in  their  religious, 
moral,  and  civil  character,  there  is  no  relation  ;  but  in  their  dramatic 
capacity  there  is  some.'  Mrs.  Montagu  was  not  aware  that  Gibber, 
whom  Young  had  named  not  disparagingly  in  his  Satires,  was  the 
brother  of  his  old  schoolfellow  ;  but  to  return  to  our  hero.  'The 
waters,' says  Mrs.  Montagu,  'have  raised  his  .spirits  to  a  fine  pitch, 
as  your  grace  will  imagine,  when.  I  tell  you  how  sublime  an  answer  he 
made  to  a  very  vulgar  question.  I  asked  him  how  long  he  stayed  at 
the  Wells  :  he  said,  As  long  as  my  rival  stayed  ; — as  long  as  the  sun 
did. '    Among  the  visitors  at  the  Wells  were  Lady  Sunderland  (wife  of 


1 8      WORLDLINESS  AND  OTHER  WORLDLINESS: 


Sir  Robert  Sutton)  and  her  sister,  Mrs.  Tichborne.  '  He  did  an 
admirable  thing  to  Lady  Sunderland :  on  her  mentioning  Sir  Robert 
Sutton,  he  asked  her  where  Sir  Robert's  lady  was ;  on  which  we  all 
laughed  very  heartily,  and  I  brought  him  off,  half  ashamed,  to  my 
lodgings,  where,  during  breakfast,  he  assured  me  he  had  asked  after 
Lady  Sunderland  because  he  had  a  great  honor  for  her ;  and  that, 
having  a  respect  for  her  sister,  he  designed  to  have  inquired  after  her, 
if  we  had  not  put  it  out  of  his  head  by  laughing  at  him.  You  must 
know,  Mrs.  Tichborne  sat  next  to  Lady  Sunderland.  It  would  have 
been  admirable  to  have  had  him  finish  his  comphment  in  that  man- 
ner.' .  .  .  '  His  expressions  all  bear  the  stamp  of  novelty,  and  his 
thoughts  of  sterhng  sense.  He  practises  a  kind  of  philosophical  absti- 
nence. ...  He  carried  Mrs.  Rolt  and  myself  to  Tunbridge,  five  miles 
from  hence,  wliere  we  were  to  see  some  fine  old  ruins.  .  .  .  First  rode 
the  doctor  on  a  tall  steed,  decently  caparisoned  in  dark  gray  ;  next, 
ambled  Mrs.  Rolt  on  a  hackney  horse  ;  .  .  .  then  followed  your  humble 
servant  on  a  milk-white  palfrey.  I  rode  on  in  safety,  and  at  leisure  to 
observe  the  company,  especially  the  two  figures  that  brought  up  the 
rear.  The  first  was  my  servant,  vaUantly  armed  with  two  uncharged 
pistols  ;  the  last  was  the  doctor's  man,  whose  uncombed  hair  so 
resembled  the  name  of  the  horse  he  rode,  one  could  not  help  imagin- 
ing they  were  of  kin,  and  wishing,  for  the  honor  of  the  family,  that  they 
had  had  one  comb  betwixt  them.  On  his  head  was  a  velvet  cap, 
much  resembling  a  black  saucepan,  and  on  his  side  hung  a  little 
basket.  At  last  we  arrived  at  the  King's  Head,  where  the  loyalty 
of  the  doctor  induced  him  to  alight ;  and  then,  knight-errant-like,  he 
took  his  damsels  frbm  off  their  palfreys,  and  courteously  handed  us  into 
the  inn.'  .  .  .  The  party  returned  to  the  Wells;  and  'the  silver  Cyn- 
thia held  up  her  lamp  in  the  heavens '  the  while.  '  The  night  silenced 
all  but  our  divine  doctor,  who  sometimes  uttered  things  fit  to  be  spoken 
in  a  season  when  all  nature  seems  to  be  hushed  and  hearkening.  I 
followed,  gathering  wisdom  as  I  went,  till  1  found,  by  my  horse's 
stumbling,  that  I  was  in  a  bad  road,  and  that  the  bhnd  was  leading 
the  blind.  So  I  placed  my  servant  between  the  doctor  and  myself ; 
which  he  not  perceiving,  went  on  in  a  most  philosophical  strain,  to  the 
great  admiration  of  my  poor  clown  of  a  servant,  who,  not  being 
wrought  up  to  any  pitch  of  enthusiasm,  nor  making  any  answer  to  all 
the  fine  things  he  heard,  the  doctor,  wondering  I  was  dumb,  and 
grieving  I  was  so  stupid,  looked  round  and  declared  his  surprise.'" 

Young's  oddity  and  absence  of  mind  are  gathered  from 
other  sources  besides  these  stories  of  Mrs.  Montagu's,  and 
gave  rise  to  the  report  that  he  was  the  original  of  Fielding's 
"Parson  Adams;"  but  this  Croft  denies,  and  mentions 
another  Yoiang,  who  really  sat  for  the  portrait,  and  who,  we 
imagine,  had  both  more  Greek  and  more  genuine  simplicity 
than  the  poet.  His  love  of  chatting  with  Colley  Gibber  was 
an  indication  that  the  old  predilection  for  the  stage  survived, 
in  spite  of  his  contempt  for  "all  joys  but  joys  that  never  can 
expire;"  and  the  production  of  "The  Brothers"  at  Drury 


THE  POET  YOUNG. 


19 


Lane  in  1753,  after  a  suppression  of  fifteen  years,  was  per- 
haps not  entirely  due  to  the  expressed  desire  to  give  the 
proceeds  to  the  society  for  the  Propagation  of  the  Gospel. 
The  author's  profits  were  not  more  than  ^400 — in  those 
days  a  disappointing  sum ;  and  Young,  as  we  learn  from  his 
friend  Richardson,  did  not  make  this  the  limit  of  his  dona- 
tion, but  gave  a  thousand  guineas  to  the  Society.  "  I  had 
some  talk  with  him,"  says  Richardson,  in  one  of  his  letters, 
"about  this  great  action.  '  I  always,'  said  he,  'intended  to 
do  something  handsome  for  the  society.  Had  I  deferred  it 
to  my  demise,  I  should  have  given  away  my  son's  money. 
All  the  world  are  inclined  to  pleasure;  could  I  have  given 
myself  a  greater  by  disposing  of  the  sum  to  a  different  use, 
I  should  have  done  it.'" 

His  next  work  was  "The  Centaur  not  Fabulous;  in  Six 
Letters  to  a  friend,  on  the  Life  in  Vogue,"  which  reads  very- 
much  like  the  most  objurgatory  parts  of  the  "Night 
Thoughts"  reduced  to  prose.  It  is  preceded  by  a  preface 
which,  though  addressed  to  a  lady,  is  in  its  denunciations  of 
vice  as  grossly  indecent  and  almost  as  flippant  as  the 
epilogues  written  by  "friends,"  which  he  allowed  to  be 
reprinted  after  his  tragedies  in  the  latest  edition  of  his 
works.  We  like,  much  better  than  "The  Centaur,"  "Con- 
jectures on  Original  Composition,"  written  in  1759,  for  the 
sake,  he  says,  of  communicating  to  the  world  the  well-known 
anecdote  about  Addison's  deathbed,  and,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  his  poem  on  Resignation,  the  last  thing  he  ever  pub- 
lished. 

The  estrangement  from  his  son,  which  must  have  embit- 
tered the  later  years  of  his  life,  appears  to  have  begun  not 
many  years  after  the  mother's  death.  On  the  marriage  of 
her  second  daughter,  who  had  previously  presided  over 
Young's  household,  a  Mrs.  Hallows,  understood  to  be  a 
woman  of  discreet  age,  and  the  daughter  (or  widow)  of  a 
clergyman  who  was  an  old  friend  of  Young's,  became  house- 
keeper at  Welwyn.  Opinions  about  ladies  are  apt  to  differ. 
"Mrs.  Hallows  was  a  woman  of  piety,  improved  by  read- 
ing," says  one  witness.  "She  was  a  very  coarse  woman," 
says  Dr.  Johnson ;  and  we  shall  presently  find  some  indirect 
evidence  that  her  temper  was  perhaps  not  quite  so  much 
improved  as  her  piety.  Servants,  it  seems,  were  not  fond  of 
remaining  long  in  the  house  with  her;  a  satirical  curate, 


20       WORLDLINESS  AND  OTHER  WORLDLINESS: 


named  Kidgell,  hints  at  "drops  of  Juniper"  taken  as  a  cor- 
dial (but  perhaps  he  was  spiteful,  and  a  teetotaler);  and 
Young's  son  is  said  to  have  told  his  father  that an  old  man 
should  not  resign  himself  to  the  management  of  anybody." 
The  result  was,  that  the  son  was  banished  from  home  for 
the  rest  of  his  father's  lifetime,  though  Young  seems  never 
to  have  thought  of  disinheriting  him. 

Our  latest  glimpses  of  the  aged  poet  are  derived  from 
certain  letters  of  Mr.  Jones,  his  curate — letters  preserved  in 
the  British  Museum,  and,  happily,  made  accessible  to  com- 
mon mortals  in  Nichols's  "Anecdotes."  Mr.  Jones  was  a 
man  of  some  literary  activity  and  ambition — a  collector  of 
interesting  documents,  and  one  of  those  concerned  in  the 
"  Free  and  Candid  Disquisitions,"  the  design  of  which  was 
"  to  point  out  such  things  in  our  ecclesiastical  establishment  as 
want  to  be  reviewed  and  amended."  On  these  and  kindred 
subjects  he  corresponded  with  Dr.  Birch,  occasionally  troub- 
ling him  with  queries  and  manuscripts.  We  have  a  respect 
for  Mr.  Jones.  Unlike  most  persons  who  trouble  others 
with  queries  or  manuscripts,  he  mitigates  the  infliction  by 
such  gifts  as  "  a  fat  pullet,"  wishing  he  "  had  anything  better 
to  send ;  but  this  depauperizing  vicarage  (of  Alconbury)  too 
often  checks  the  freedom  and  forwardness  of  my  mind." 
Another  day  comes  a  "pound  canister  of  tea;  "  another  a 
"  young  fatted  goose."  Mr.  Jones's  first  letter  from  Welwyn 
is  dated  June,  1759,  not  quite  six  years  before  Young's 
death.  In  June,  1762,  he  expresses  a  wish  to  go  to  London 
"  this  summer.    But,"  he  continues, 

"  My  time  and  pains  are  almost  continually  taken  up  here,  and  .  .  . 
I  have  been  (I  now  find)  a  considerable  loser,  upon  the  whole,  by  con- 
tinuing here  so  long.  The  consideration  of  this,  and  the  inconvenience 
I  sustained,  and  do  still  experience,  from  my  late  illness,  obliged  me 
at  last  to  acquaint  the  Doctor  (Young)  with  my  case,  and  to  assure 
him  that  I  plainly  perceived  the  duty  and  confinement  here  to  be  too 
much  for  me  ;  for  which  reason  I  must  (I  said)  beg  to  be  at  liberty  to 
resign  my  charge  at  Michaelmas.  I  began  to  give  him  these  notices 
in  February,  when  I  was  very  ill ;  and  now  I  perceive,  by  what  he 
told  me  the  other  day,  that  he  is  in  some  difficulty  ;  for  which  reason 
he  is  at  last  (he  says)  resolved  to  advertise,  and  even  {which  is  much 
wondered  at)  to  raise  the  salary  considerably  higher.  (What  he 
allowed  my  predecessors  was  £20  per  annum  ;  and  now  he  proposes 
£50,  as  he  tells  me.)  I  never  asked  him  to  raise  it  for  me,  though  I 
well  knew  it  was  not  equal  to  the  duty  ;  nor  did  I  say  a  word  about 
myself  when  he  lastly  suggessted  to  me  his  intentions  upon  this  sub- 
ject." 


THE  POET  YOUNG. 


11 


In  a  postscript  to  this  letter  he  says : 

"I  may  mention  to  you  farther,  as  a  friend  that  may  be  tiusted, 
that,  in  all  likelihood,  the  poor  old  gentleman  will  not  find  it  a  very 
easy  matter,  unless  by  dint  of  money,  and  force  upon  himself,  to  pro- 
cure a  man  that  he  can  like  for  his  next  curate,  nor  one  that  will  stay 
with  him  so  long  as  I  have  done.  Then,  his  great  age  will  recur  to 
people's  thoughts  ;  and  if  he  has  any  foibles,  either  in  temper  or  con- 
duct, they  will  be  sure  not  to  be  forgotten  on  this  occasion  by  those 
who  know  him  ;  and  those  who  do  not  will  probably  be  on  their  guard. 
On  these  and  the  like  considerations,  it  is  by  no  means  an  eligible 
office  to  be  seeking  out  for  a  curate  for  him,  as  he  has  several  times 
wished  me  to  do  ;  and  would,  if  he  knew  that  I  am  now  writing  to  you, 
wish  your  assistance  also.  But  my  best  friends  here,  who  well  fore- 
see the  probable  consequences,  and  wish  me  well,  earnestly  dissuade 
me  from  complying  ;  and  I  will  decline  the  office  with  as  much  decency 
as  I  can  ;  but  high  salary  will,  I  suppose,  fetch  in  somebody  or  other, 
soon." 

In  the  following  July  he  writes 

"  The  old  gentleman  here  (I  may  venture  to  tell  you  freely)  seems 
to  me  to  be  in  a  pretty  odd  way  of  late — moping,  dejected,  self-willed, 
and  as  if  surrounded  with  some  perplexing  circumstances.  Though  I 
visit  him  pretty  frequently  for  short  intervals,  I  say  very  little  to  his 
affairs,  not  choosing  to  be  a  party  concerned,  especially  in  cases  of  so 
critical  and  tender  a  nature.  There  is  much  mystery  in  almost  all  his 
temporal  affairs,  as  well  as  in  many  of  his  speculative  theories.  Who- 
ever lives  in  this  neighborhood  to  see  his  exit,  will  probably  see  and 
hear  some  very  strange  things.  Time  will  show ;  I  am  afraid,  not 
greatly  to  his  credit.  There  is  thought  to  be  an  irremovable  obstruc- 
tion to  his  happiness  within  his  walls,  as  well  as  another  without 
them;  but  the  former  is  the  more  powerful,  and  like  to  continue  so. 
He  has  this  day  been  trying  anew  to  engage  me  to  stay  with  him.  No 
lucrative  views  can  tempt  me  to  sacrifice  my  liberty  or  my  health  to 
such  measures  as  are  proposed  here.  Nor  do  I  like  to  have  to  do 
with  persons  whose  word  and  honor  cannot  be  depended  on.  So 
much  for  this  very  odd  and  unhappy  topic." 

In  August,  Mr.  Jones's  tone  is  slightly  modified.  Earnest 
entreaties,  not  lucrative  considerations,  have  induced  him  to 
cheer  the  Doctor's  dejected  heart  by  remaining  at  Welwyn 
some  time  longer.  The  Doctor  is,  In  various  respects,  a 
very  unhappy  man,"  and  few  know  so  much  of  these  ''respects" 
as  Mr.  Jones.    In  September  he  recurs  to  the  subject: 

"My  ancient  gentleman  here  is  still  full  of  trouble:  which  moves 
my  concern,  though  it  moves  only  the  secret  laughter  of  many,  and 
some  untoward  surmises  in  favor  of  him  and  his  household.  The 
loss  of  a  very  large  sum  of  money  (about  .£200)  is  talked  of ;  whereof 


22      WORLDLINESS  AND  OTHER  WORLDLINESS: 


this  vill  and  neighborhood  is  full.  Some  disbelieve ;  others  say,  *  It 
is  no  wonder,  where  about  eighteen  or  more  servants  are  sometimes 
taken  and  dismissed  in  the  course  of  a  year. '  The  gentleman  himself 
is  allowed  by  all  to  be  far  more  harmless  and  easy  in  his  family  than 
some  one  else  who  hath  too  much  the  lead  in  it.  This,  among  others, 
was  one  reason  for  my  late  motion  to  quit." 

No  other  mention  of  Young's  affairs  occurs  until  April  2, 
1765,  when  he  says  that  Dr.  Young  is  very  ill,  attended  by 
two  physicians: 

"  Having  mentioned  this  young  gentleman  (Dr.  Young's  son),  I 
would  acquaint  you  next,  that  he  came  hither  this  morning,  having 
been  sent  for,  as  I  am  told,  by  the  direction  of  Mrs.  Hallows.  In- 
deed, she  intimated  to  me  as  much  herself.  And  if  this  be  so,  I  must 
say  that  it  is  one  of  the  most  prudent  acts  she  ever  did,  or  could  have 
done,  in  such  a  case  as  this ;  as  it  may  prove  a  means  of  preventing 
much  confusion  after  the  death  of  the  Doctor.  I  have  had  some  little 
discourse  with  the  son  :  he  seems  much  affected,  and  I  beheve  really 
is  so.  He  earnestly  wishes  his  father  might  be  pleased  to  ask  after 
him ;  for  you  must  know  he  has  not  yet  done  this,  nor  is,  in  my 
opinion,  like  to  do  it.  And  it  has  been  said  farther,  that  upon  a  late 
apphcation  made  to  him  on  the  behalf  of  his  son,  he  desired  that  no 
more  might  be  said  to  him  about  it.    How  true  this  may  be,  I  cannot 

as  yet  be  certain ;  all  I  shall  say  is,  it  seems  not  improbable  I 

heartily  wish  the  ancient  man's  heart  may  prove  tender  towards  his 
son ;  though,  knowing  him  so  well,  I  can  scarce  hope  to  hear  such 
desirable  news. ' ' 

Eleven  days  later,  he  writes : 

"  I  have  now  the  pleasure  to  acquaint  you,  that  the  late  Dr.  Young, 
though  he  had  for  many  years  kept  his  son  at  a  distance  from  him,  yet 
has  now  at  last  left  him  all  his  possessions,  after  the  payment  of  certain 
legacies  ;  so  that  the  young  gentleman  (who  bears  a  fair  character,  and 
behaves  well,  as  far  as  I  can  hear  or  see)  will,  I  hope,  soon  enjoy  and 
make  a  prudent  use  of  a  handsome  fortune.  The  father,  on  his  death- 
bed, and  since  my  return  from  London,  was  applied  to  in  the  tender- 
est  manner,  by  one  of  his  physicians,  and  by  another  person,  to  admit 
the  son  into  his  presence,  to  make  submission,  entreat  forgiveness,  and 
obtain  his  blessing.  As  to  an  interview  with  his  son,  he  intimated 
that  he  chose  to  decline  it,  as  his  spirits  were  then  low  and  his  nerves 
weak.  With  regard  to  the  next  particular,  he  said.  '  /  heartily  for- 
give him  y  and  upon  mention  of  this  last,  he  gently  lifted  up  his  hand, 
and  letting  it  gently  fall,  pronounced  these  words,  '  God  bless  him  !  ' 

...  I  know  it  will  give  you  pleasure  to  be  farther  informed  that  he 
was  pleased  to  make  respectful  mention  of  me  in  his  will ;  expressing 
his  satisfaction  in  my  care  of  his  parish,  bequeathing  to  me  a  hand- 
some legacy,  and  appointing  me  to  be  one  of  his  executors." 

So  far  Mr.  Jones,  in  his  confidential  correspondence  with 


THE  POET  YOUNG. 


23 


a  "friend  who  may  be  trusted.''  In  a  letter  communicated, 
apparently  by  him,  to  the  Gentleman' s  Magazine  seventeen 
years  later — namely,  in  1782 — on  the  appearance  of  Croft's 
biography  of  Young,  we  find  him  speaking  of  "  the  ancient 
gentleman"  in  a  tone  of  reverential  eulogy,  quite  at  variance 
with  the  free  comments  we  have  just  quoted.  But  the  Rev. 
John  Jones  was  probably  of  opinion,  with  Mrs.  Montagu, 
whose  contemporary  and  retrospective  letters  are  also  set  in 
a  different  key,  that*' the  interests  of  religion  were  connected 
with  the  character  of  a  man  so  distinguished  of  piety  as  Dr. 
Young.''  At  all  events,  a  subsequent  quasi  official  state- 
ment weighs  nothing  as  evidence  against  contemporary, 
spontaneous,  and  confidential  hints. 

To  Mrs.  Hallows,  Young  left  a  legacy  of  ;^iooo,  with  the 
request  that  she  would  destroy  all  his  manuscripts.  This 
final  request,  from  some  unknown  cause,  was  not  complied 
with,  and  among  the  papers  he  left  behind  him  was  the 
following  letter  from  Archbishop  Seeker,  which  probably 
marks  the  date  of  his  latest  effort  after  preferment : 

Deanery  of  St.  Paul's,  July  8,  1758. 
"Good  Dr.  Young, — I  have  long  wondered  that  more  suitable 
notice  of  your  great  merit  hath  not  been  taken  by  persons  in  power. 
But  how  to  remedy  the  omission  I  see  not.  No  encouragement  hath 
ever  been  given  me  to  mention  things  of  this  nature  to  his  Majesty. 
And  therefore,  in  all  likehhood,  the  only  consequence  of  doing  it 
would  be  weakening  the  little  influence  which  else  I  may  possibly 
have  on  some  other  occasions.  Your  fortune  and  your  reputation 
set  you  above  the  need  of  advancement ;  and  your  sentiments  above 
that  concern  for  it  on  your  own  account,  which  on  that  of  the  public, 
is  sincerely  felt  by  Your  loving  Brother, 

"Tho.,  Cant." 

The  loving  brother's  irony  is  severe ! 

Perhaps  the  least  questionable  testimony  to  the  better  side 
of  Young's  character  is  that  of  Bishop  Hildesley,  who,  as 
the  vicar  of  a  parish  near  Welwyn,  had  been  Young's  neigh- 
bor for  upwards  of  twenty  years.  The  affection  of  the  clergy 
for  each  other,  we  have  observed,  is,  like  that  of  the  fair  sex, 
not  at  all  of  a  blind  and  infatuated  kind ;  and  we  may  there- 
fore the  rather  believe  them  when  they  give  each  other  any 
extra-official  praise.  Bishop  Hildesley,  then,  writing  of 
Young  to  Richardson,  says : 

'•The  impertinence  of  my  frequent  visits  to  him  was  amply  rewarded ; 


24       WORLDLXNESS  AND  OTHER  WORLDLTNESS: 


forasmuch  as,  I  can  truly  say,  he  never  received  me  but  with  agree- 
able open  complacency;  and  I  never  left  him  but  with  profitable 
pleasure  and  improvement.  He  was  one  or  other,  the  most  modest, 
the  most  patient  of  contradiction,  and  the  most  informing  and  enter- 
taining I  ever  conversed  with — at  least,  of  any  man  who  had  so  just 
pretensions  to  pertinacity  and  reserve." 

Mr.  Langton,  however,  who  was  also  a  frequent  visitor  of 
Young's  informed  Boswell, 

"That  there  was  an  air  of  benevolence  in  his  manner ;  but  that  he 
could  obtain  from  him  less  information  than  he  had  hoped  to  receive 
from  one  who  had  lived  so  much  in  intercourse  with  the  brightest  men 
of  what  had  been  called  the  Augustan  age  of  England  ;  and  that  she 
showed  a  degree  of  eager  curiosity  concerning  the  common  occur- 
rences that  were  then  passing,  which  appeared  somewhat  remarkable 
in  a  man  of  such  intellectual  stores,  of  such  an  advanced  age,  and 
who  had  retired  from  life  with  declared  disappointment  of  his  expect- 
tations." 

The  same  substance,  we  know,  will  exhibit  different  quali- 
ties under  different  tests;  and,  after  all,  imperfect  reports  of 
individual  impressions,  whether  immediate  or  traditional, 
are  a  very  frail  basis  on  which  to  build  our  opinion  of  a 
man.  One's  character  may  be  very  indifferently  mirrored 
in  the  mind  of  the  most  intimate  neighbor;  it  all  depends  on 
the  quality  of  that  gentleman's  reflecting  surface. 

But,  discarding  any  inferences  from  such  uncertain  evi- 
dence, the  outline  of  Young's  character  is  too  distinctly 
traceable  in  the  well-attested  facts  of  his  life,  and  yet  more 
in  the  self-betrayal  that  runs  through  all  his  works,  for  us  to 
fear  that  our  general  estimate  of  him  may  be  false.  For, 
while  no  poet  seems  less  easy  and  spontaneous  than  Young, 
no  poet  discloses  himself  more  completely.  Men's  minds 
have  no  hiding-place  out  of  themselves — their  affectations 
do  but  betray  another  phase  of  their  nature.  And  if,  in  the 
present  view  of  Young,  we  seem,  to  be  more  intent  on  laying 
bare  unfavorable  facts  than  on  shrouding  them  in  charitable 
speeches,  it  is  not  because  we  have  any  irreverential  pleasure 
in  turning  men's  characters  the  seamy  side  without,  but 
because  we  see  no  great  advantage  in  considering  a  man  as 
he  was  not.  Young's  biographers  and  critics  have  usually 
set  out  from  the  position  that  he  was  a  great  religious 
teacher,  and  that  his  poetry  is  morally  sublime ;  and  they 
have  toned  down  his  failings  into  harmony  with  their  con- 
ception of  the  divine  and  the  poet.    For  our  own  part,  we 


THE  POET  YOUNG. 


25 


set  out  from  precisely  the  opposite  conviction — namely,  that 
the  religious  and  moral  spirit  of  Young's  poetry  is  low  and 
false;  and  we  think  it  of  some  importance  to  show  that  the 
"Night  Thoughts"  are  the  reflex  of  a  mind  in  which  the 
*  higher  human  sympathies  were  inactive.  This  judgment  is 
entirely  opposed  to  our  youthful  predilections  and  enthu- 
siasm. The  sweet  garden-breath  of  early  enjoyment  lingers 
about  many  a  page  of  the  Night  Thoughts,"  and  even  of  the 
"Last  Day,"  giving  an  extrinsic  charm  to  passages  of  stilted 
rhetoric  and  false  sentiment;  but  the  sober  and  repeated 
reading  of  maturer  years  has  convinced  us  that  it  would 
hardly  be  possible  to  find  a  more  typical  instance  than 
Young's  poetry  of  the  mistake  which  substitutes  interested 
obedience  for  sympathetic  emotion,  and  baptizes  egoism  as 
religion. 

Pope  said  of  Young  that  he  had  "  much  of  a  sublime 
genius  without  common-sense."  The  deficiency  Pope  meant 
to  indicate  was,  we  imagine,  moral  rather  than  intellectual : 
it  was  the  want  of  that  fine  sense  of  what  is  fitting  in  speech 
and  action  which  is  often  eminently  possessed  by  men  and 
women  whose  intellect  is  of  a  very  common  order,  but  who  , 
have  the  sincerity  and  dignity  which  can  never  coexist  with 
the  selfish  preoccupations  of  vanity  or  interest.  This  was 
the  ''common-sense"  in  which  Young  was  conspicuously 
deficient ;  and  it  was  partly  owing  to  this  deficiency  that  his 
genius,  waiting  to  be  determined  by  the  highest  prizes, 
fluttered  uncertainly  from  effort  to  effort,  until,  when  he  was 
more  than  sixty,  it  suddenly  spread  its  broad  wing,  and 
soared  so  as  to  arrest  the  gaze  of  other  generations  besides 
his  own.  For  he  had  no  versatility  of  faculty  to  mislead 
him.  The  Night  Thoughts"  only  differ  from  his  previous 
works  in  the  degree  and  not  in  the  kind  of  power  they  mani- 
fest. Whether  he  writes  prose  or  poetry,  rhyme  or  blank 
verse,  dramas,  satires,  odes,  or  meditations,  we  see  every- 
where the  same  Young — the  same  narrow  circle  of  thoughts, 
the  same  love  of  abstractions,  the  same  telescopic  view  of 
human  things,  the  same  appetency  towards  antithetic  apo- 
thegm and  rhapsodic  climax.  The  passages  that  arrest  us 
in  his  tragedies  are  those  in  which  he  anticipates  some  fine 
passage  in  the  "Night  Thoughts,"  and  where  his  characters 
are  only  transparent  shadows  through  which  we  see  the 


26     WORLDLINESS  AND  OTHER  WO RLDLINESS : 


bewigged  embonpoint  of  the  didactic  poet,  excogitating  epi- 
grams or  ecstatic  soliloquies  by  the  light  of  a  candle  fixed 
in  a  skull.  Thus,  in  "The  Revenge,"  Alonzo,  in  the  conflict 
of  jealousy  and  love  that  at  once  urges  and  forbids  him  to 
murder  his  wife,  says : 

"  This  vast  and  solid  earth,  that  blazing  sun, 
Those^skies,  through  which  it  rolls,  must  all  have  end. 
What  then  is  man  ?    The  smallest  part  of  nothing. 
Day  buries  day  ;  month,  month  ;  and  year  the  ^ear ! 
Our  life  is  but  a  chain  of  many  deaths. 
Can  then  Death's  self  be  feared?    Our  life  much  rather: 
Life  is  the  desert,  life  the  solitude  ; 
Death  joins  us  to  the  great  majority  : 
'Tis  to  be  born  to  Plato  and  to  Caesar; 
'Tis  to  be  great  forever  ; 
'Tis  pleasure,  'tis  ambition,  then,  to  die." 

His  prose  writings  all  read  like  the  "  Night  Thoughts," 
either  diluted  into  prose,  or  not  yet  crystallized  into  poetry. 
For  example,  in  his    Thoughts  for  Age,"  he  says : 

"  Though  we  stand  on  its  awful  brink,  such  is  our  leaden  bias  to  the 
world,  we  turn  our  faces  the  wrong  way ;  we  are  still  looking  on  our 
old  acquaintance.  Time  ;  though  now  so  wasted  and  reduced,  that  we 
can  see  little  more  of  him  than  his  wings  and  his  scythe  :  our  age  en- 
larges his  wings  to  our  imagination :  and  our  fear  of  death,  his  scythe  ; 
as  Time  himself  grows  less.  His  consumption  is  deep ;  his  annihila- 
tion is  at  hand." 

This  is  a  dilution  of  the  magnificent  image: 

**  Time  in  advance  behind  him  hides  his  wings, 
And  seems  to  creep  decrepit  with  his  age. 
Behold  him  when  past  by  !    What  then  is  seen 
But  his  proud  pinions,  swifter  than  the  winds?" 

Again : 

••A  requesting  Omnipotence?  What  can  stun  and  confound  thy 
reason  more?  What  more  can  ravish  and  exalt  thy  heart?  It  can- 
not but  ravish  and  exalt  ;  it  cannot  but  gloriously  disturb  and  perplex 
thee,  to  take  in  all  that  thought  suggests.  Thou  child  of  the  dust ! 
Thou  speck  of  misery  and  sin  !  How  abject  thy  weakness !  How  great  is 
thy  power  !  Thou  crawler  on  earth,  and  possible  (I  was  about  to  say) 
controller  of  the  skies  !  Weigh,  and  weigh  well,  the  wondrous  truths  I 
have  in  view :  which  cannot  be  weighed  too  much  ;  which  the  more 
they  are  weighed,  amaze  the  more  ;  which  to  have  supposed,  before 
they  were  revealed,  would  have  been  as  great  madness,  and  to  have 
presumed  on  as  great  sin,  as  it  is  now  madness  and  sin  not  to  believe," 


THE  POET  YOUNG. 


27 


Even  'in  his  Pindaric  odes,  in  which  he  made  the  most 
violent  effort  against  nature,  he  is  still  neither  more  nor  less 
than  the  Young  of  the  Last  Day,"  emptied  and  swept  of 
his  genius,  and  possessed  by  seven  demons  of  fustian  and 
bad  rhyme.  Even  here,  his  Ercles'  vein"  alternates  with 
his  moral  platitudes,  and  we  have  the  perpetual  text  of  the 
"  Night  Thoughts :  " 

**  Gold  pleasure  buys  ; 

But  pleasure  dies, 
For  soon  the  gross  fruition  cloys ; 

Though  raptures  court, 

The  sense  is  short ; 
But  virtue  kindles  living  joys  ; 

Joys  felt  alone  ! 

Joys  asked  of  none  ! 
Which  Time's  and  Fortune's  arrows  miss  : 

Joys  that  subsist, 

Though  fates  resist, 
An  unprecarious,  endless  bhss  ! 

Unhappy  they  ! 

And  falsely  gay  ! 
Who  bask  forever  in  success  ; 

A  constant  feast 

Quite  palls  the  taste, 
And  long  enjoy me7it  is  distress.'" 

In  the  "  Last  Day,"  again,  which  is  the  earliest  thing  he 
wrote,  we  have  an  anticipation  of  all  his  greatest  faults  and 
merits.  Conspicuous  among  the  faults  is  that  attempt  to 
exalt  our  conceptions  of  Deity  by  vulgar  images  and  com- 
parisons, which  is  so  offensive  in  the  later  Night  Thoughts." 
in  a  burst  of  prayer  and  homage  to  God,  called  forth  by  the 
contemplation  of  Christ  coming  to  judgment,  he  asks,  Who 
brings  the  change  of  the  seasons  ?  and  answers  : 

"  Not  the  great  Ottoman,  or  greater  Czar  ; 
Not  Europe's  arbitress  of  peace  and  war!  " 

Conceive  the  soul,  in  its  most  solemn  moments,  assuring 
God  that  it  does  not  place  His  power  below  that  of  Louis 
Napoleon  or  Queen  Victoria ! 

But  in  the  midst  of  uneasy  ryhmes,  inappropriate  imagery, 
vaulting  sublimity  that  o'erleaps  itself,  and  vulgar  emotions, 
we  have  in  this  poem  an  occasional  flash  of  genius,  a  touch 


28      WORLDLINESS  AND  OTHER  WORLDLINESS: 


of  simple  grandeur,  which  promises  as  much  as  Young  ever 
achieved.  Describing  the  oncoming  of  the  dissolution  of  all 
things,  he  says : 

"  No  sun  in  radiant  glory  shines  on  high ; 
No  light  but  from  the  terrors  of  the  sky^ 

And  again,  speaking  of  great  armies : 

"Whose  rear  lay  wrapt  in  night,  while  breaking  dawn 
Rous' d  the  broad  front,  and  call'd  the  battle  on." 

And  this  wail  of  the  lost  soul  is  fine : 

"And  this  for  sin? 
Could  I  offend  if  I  had  never  been  ? 
But  still  increas'd  the  senseless,  happy  mass, 
Flow'd  in  the  stream,  or  shiver  d  in  the  grass  f 
Father  of  mercies!    Why  from  silent  earth 
Didst  Thou  awake  and  curse  me  into  birth? 
Tear  me  from  quiet,  ravish  me  from  night, 
And  make  a  thankless  present  of  thy  light? 
Push  into  being  a  reverse  of  Thee, 
And  animate  a  clod  with  misery  f '  * 

But  it  is  seldom  in  Young's  rhymed  poems  that  the  effect 
of  felicitous  thought  or  image  is  not  counteracted  by  our 
sense  of  the  constraint  he  suffered  from  the  necessities  of 
rhyme,  that  ''Gothic  demon,"  as  he  afterAvards  called  it, 
''Which,  modern  poetry  tasting,  became  mortal."  In  rela- 
tion to  his  own  power,  no  one  will  question  the  truth  of  his 
dictum,  that  "blank  verse  is  verse  unfallen,  uncurst;  verse 
reclaimed,  reenthroned  in  the  true  language  of  the  gods ;  who 
never  thundered  nor  suffered  their  Homer  to  thunder  in 
rhyme."  His  want  of  mastery  in  rhyme  is  especially  a 
drawback  on  the  effect  of  his  Satires;  for  epigrams  and 
witticisms  are  peculiarly  susceptible  to  the  intrusion  of  a 
superfluous  word,  or  to  an  inversion  which  impHes  constraint. 
Here,  even  more  than  elsewhere,  the  art  that  conceals  art  is 
an  absolute  requisite,  and  to  have  a  witticism  presented  to 
us  in  limping  or  cumbrous  rhythm  is  as  counteractive  to  any 
electrifying  effect  as  to  see  the  tentative  grimaces  by  which 
a  comedian  prepares  a  grotesque  countenance.  We  discern 
the  process,  instead  of  being  startled  by  the  result. 

This  is  one  reason  why  the  Satires,  read  seriatim,  have  a 
flatness  to  us,  which,  when  we  afterwards  read  picked  pas- 


THE  POET  YOUNG. 


2$ 


sages,  we  are  inclined  to  disbelieve  in,  and  to  attribute  to 
some  deficiency  in  our  own  mood.  But  there  are  deeper 
reasons  for  that  dissatisfaction.  Young  is  not  a  satirist  of  a 
high  order.  His  satire  has  neither  the  terrible  vigor,  the 
lacerating  energy,  of  genuine  indignation,  nor  the  humor 
which  owns  loving  fellowship  with  the  poor  human  nature 
it  laughs  at;  nor  yet  the  personal  bitterness  which,  as  in 
Pope's  characters  of  Sporus  and  Atticus,  insures  those  living 
touches  by  virtue  of  which  the  individual  and  particular  in 
art  becomes  the  universal  and  immortal.  Young  could 
never  describe  a  real  complex  human  being;  but  what  he 
could  do  with  eminent  success  was  to  describe  with  neat  and 
finished  point  obvious  types  of  manners  rather  than  of  char- 
acter, to  write  cold  and  clever  epigrams  on  personified  vices 
'and  absurdities.  There  is  no  more  emotion  in  his  satire 
than  if  he  were  turning  witty  verses  on  a  waxen  image  of 
Cupid,  or  a  lady's  glove.  He  has  none  of  those  felicitous 
epithets,  none  of  those  pregnant  lines,  by  which  Pope's 
Satires  have  enriched  the  ordinary  speech  of  educated  men. 
Young's  wit  will  be  found  in  almost  every  instance  to  con- 
sist in  that  antithetic  combination  of  ideas  which,  of  all  the 
forms  of  wit,  is  most  within  reach  of  clever  effort.  In  his 
gravest  arguments,  as  well  as  in  his  lightest  satire,  one 
might  imagine  that  he  had  set  himself  to  work  out  the 
problem  how  much  antithesis  might  be  got  out  of  a  given 
subject.  And  there  he  completely  succeeds.  His  neatest 
portraits  are  all  wrought  on  this  plan.  Narcissus,  for 
example,  who — 

"  Omits  no  duty ;  nor  can  Envy  say 
He  miss'd,  these  many  years,  the  Church  or  Play : 
He  makes  no  noise  in  Parliament,  'tis  true; 
But  pays  his  debts  and  visit  when  'tis  due  ; 
His  character  and  gloves  are  ever  clean, 
And  then  he  can  out-bow  the  bowing  Dean  ; 
A  smile  eternal  on  his  Hp  he  wears, 
Which  equally  the  wise  and  worthless  shares  ; 
In  gay  fatigues,  this  most  undaunted  chief, 
Patient  of  idleness  beyond  belief. 
Most  charitably  lends  the  town  his  face 
For  ornament  in  every  public  place  ; 
As  sure  as  cards  he  to  th'  assembly  comes. 
And  is  the  furniture  of  drawing-rooms  : 
When  Ombre  calls,  his  hand  and  heart  are  free. 
And,  joined  to  two,  he  fails  not — to  make  three  : 
Narcissus  is  the  glory  of  his  race  ; 


30     WORLDLTNESS  AND  OTHER  WORLDLINESS: 


For  who  does  nothing  with  a  better  grace  ? 

To  deck  my  hst  by  nature  were  designed 

Such  shining  expletives  of  human  kind, 

Who  want,  while  through  blank  hfe  they  dream  along, 

Sense  to  be  right  and  passion  to  be  wrong." 

It  is  but  seldom  that  we  find  a  touch  of  that  easy  slyness 
which  gives  an  additional  zest  to  surprise ;  but  here  is .  an 
instance : 

"See  Tityrus,  with  merriment  possest, 
Is  burst  with  laughter  ere  he  hears  the  jest. 
What  need  he  stay?  for  when  the  joke  is  o'er, 
His /^^//^  will  be  no  whiter  than  before." 

Like  Pope,  whom  he  imitated,  he  sets  out  with  a  psycho- 
logical mistake  as  the  basis  of  his  satire,  attributing  all 
forms  of  folly  to  one  passion — the  love  of  fame,  or  vanity — 
a  much  grosser  mistake,  indeed,  than  Pope's  exaggeration 
of  the  extent  to  which  the  ruling  passion"  determines  con- 
duct in  the  individual.  Not  that  Young  is  consistent  in  his 
mistake.  He  sometimes  implies  no  more  than  what  is  the 
truth — that  the  love  of  fame  is  the  cause,  not  of  all  follies, 
but  of  many. 

Young's  satires,  on.  women  are  superior  to  Pope's,  which 
is  only  saying  that  they  are  superior  to  Pope's  greatest 
failure.  We  can  more  frequently  pick  out  a  couplet  as  suc- 
cessful than  an  entire  sketch.  Of  the  too-emphatic  Syrena, 
he  say: 

"Her  judgment  just,  her  sentence  is  too  strong  ; 
Because  she's  right,  she's  ever  in  the  wrong." 

Of  the  diplomatic  Julia: 

"For  her  own  breakfast  she'll  project  a  scheme. 
Nor  take  her  tea  without  a  stratagem." 

Of  Lyce,  the  old  painted  coquette: 

"  In  vain  the  cock  has  summoned  sprites  away  ; 
She  walks  at  noon  and  blasts  the  bloom  of  day." 

Of  the  nymph  who,  "gratis,  clears  religious  mysteries:" 

*'  'Tjs  hard,  too,  she  who  makes  no  use  but  chat 
Of  her  religion,  should  be  barr'd  in  that." 


tite  poet  young. 


31 


The  description  of  the  literary  helh,  Daphne,  well  prefaces 
that  of  Stella,  admired  by  Johnson: 

"  With  legs  toss'dhigh,  on  her  sophee  she  sits, 

Vouchsafing  audience  to  contending  wits  : 

Of  each  performance  she's  the  final  test; 

One  act  read  o'er,  she  prophesies  the  rest ; 

And  then,  pronouncing  with  decisive  air, 

Fully  convinces  all  the  town — shcs  fair.  , 

Had  lovely  Daphne  Hecatessa's  face, 

How  would  her  elegance  of  taste  decrease  ! 

Some  ladies'  judgment  in  their  features  lies, 

And  all  their  genius  sparkles  in  their  eyes. 

But  hold,  she  cries,  lampooner  !  have  a  care  : 

Must  I  want  common-sense  because  I'm  fair? 

O  no  ;  see  Stella  :  her  eyes  shine  as  bright 

As  if  her  tongue  was  never  in  the  right  ; 

And  yet  what  real  learning,  judgment,  fire  ! 

She  seems  inspir'd,  and  can  herself  inspire. 

How  then  if  mahce  ruled  not  all  the  fair 

Could  Daphne  publish,  and  cozild  she  forbear  f 

After  all,  when  we  have  gone  through  Young's  seven 
Satires,  we  seem  to  have  made  but  an  indifferent  meal. 
They  are  a  sort  of  fricassee,  with  little  solid  meat  in  them, 
and  yet  the  flavor  is  not  always  piquant.  It  is  curious  to  find 
him,  when  he  pauses  a  moment  from  his  satiric  sketching, 
recurring  to  his  old  platitudes : 

"  Can  gold  calm  passion,  or  make  reason  shine 
Can  we  dig  peace  or  wisdom  from  the  mine  ? 
Wisdom  to  gold  prefer ;  "  — 

platitudes  which  he  seems  inevitably  to  fall  into,  for  the  same 
reason  that  some  men  are  constantly  asserting  their  contempt 
for  criticism — because  he  felt  the  opposite  so  keenly. 

The  outburst  of  genius  in  the  earlier  books  of  the  ''Night 
Thoughts"  is  the  more  remarkable,  that  in  the  interval 
between  them  and  the  Satires  he  had  produced  nothing  but 
his  Pindaric  odes,  jn  which  he  fell  far  below  the  level  of  his 
previous  works.  Two  sources  of  this  sudden  strength  were 
the  freedom  of  blank  verse  and  the  presence  of  a  genuine 
emotion.  Most  persons,  in  speaking  of  the  "Night 
Thoughts,"  have  in  their  minds  only  the  two  or  three  first 
Nights,  the  majority  of  readers  rarely  getting  beyond  these, 
unless,  as  Wilson  says,  they  ''have  but  few  books,  are  poor, 
and  Hve  in  the  country."    And  in  these  earliev  Nights  there 


32      WORLDLINESS  AND  OTHER  WORLDLINESS: 


is  enough  genuine  sublimity  and  genuine  sadness  to  bribe  us 
into  too  favorable  a  judgment  of  them  as  a  whole.  Young 
had  only  a  very  few  things  to  say  or  sing — such  as  that  life  is 
vain,  that  death  is  imminent,  that  man  is  immortal,  that 
virtue  is  wisdom,  that  friendship  is  sweet,  and  that  the  source 
of  virtue  is  the  contemplation  of  death  and  immortality — and 
even  in  his  two  first  Nights  he  had  said  almost  all  he  had  to 
say  in  his  finest  manner.  Through  these  first  outpourings 
of  "complaint"  we  feel  that  the  poet  is  really  sad,  that  the 
bird  is  singing  over  a  rifled  nest,  and  we  bear  with  his  mor- 
bid picture  of  the  world  and,  of  life,  as  the  Joblike  lament  of 
a  man  whom  "the  hand  of  God  hath  touched."  Death  has 
carried  away  his  best-beloved,  and  that  "silent  land''  whither 
they  are  gone  has  more  reality  for  the  desolate  one  than  this 
world  which  is  empty  of  their  love: 

"This  is  the  desert,  this  the  solitude  ; 
How  populous,  how  vital  is  the  grave ! ' ' 

Joy  died  with  the  loved  one : 

"The  disenchanted  earth 
Lost  all  her  lustre.    Where  her  ghtt'ring  towers? 
Her  golden  mountains,  where?    All  darken' d  down 
To  naked  waste  ;  a  dreary  vale  of  tears  : 
The  great  magician' s  dead  V 

Under  the  pang  of  parting,  it  seems  to  the  bereaved  man  as 
if  love  were  only  a  nerve  to  suffer  with,  and  he  sickens  at  the 
thought  of  every  joy  of  which  he  must  one  day  say,  ''it  was!' 
In  its  unreasoning  anguish,  the  soul  rushes  to  the  idea  of 
perpetuity  as  the  one  element  of  bliss : 

"O  ye  blest  scenes  of  permanent  delight! 
Could  ye,  so  rich  in  rapture,  fear  an  end — 
That  ghastly  thought  would  drink  up  all  your  joy, 
And  quite  unparadise  the  realms  of  light." 

In  a  man  under  the  immediate  pressure  of  a  great  sorrow 
we  tolerate  morbid  exaggerations ;  we  are  prepared  to  see 
him  turn  away  a  weary  eye  from  sunlight  and  flowers  and 
sweet  human  faces,,  as  if  this  rich  and  glorious  life  had  no 
significance  but  as  a  preliminary  of  death ;  we  do  not  criticise 
his  views,  we  compassionate  his  feelings.  And  so  it  is  with 
Young  in  these  earlier  Nights.    There  is  already  some  arti- 


THE  POET  YOUNG. 


33 


ficiality  even  in  his  grief,  and  feeling  often  slides  into  rhetoric, 
but  through  it  all  we  are  thrilled  with  the  unmistakable  cry 
of  pain,  which  makes  us  tolerant  of  egoism  and  hyperbole : 

In  every  varied  posture,  place  and  hour, 
How  widow'd  ev'ry  thought  of  ev'ry  joy! 
Thought,  busy  thought !  too  busy  for  my  peace ! 
Through  the  dark  Postern  of  time  long  elapsed 
Led  softly,  by  the  stillness  of  the  night — 
Led  hke  a  murderer  (and  such  it  proves  !) 
Strays,  wretched  rover !  o'er  the  pleasing  past — 
In  quest  of  wretchedness,  perversely  strays  ; 
And  finds  all  desert  now  ;  and  meets  the  ghosts 
Of  my  departed  joys." 

But  when  he  becomes  didactic,  rather  than  complaining — 
when  he  ceases  to  sing  his  sorrows,  and  begins  to  insist  on 
his  opinions —  when  that  distaste  for  life  which  we  pity  as  a 
transient  feeling  is  thrust  upon  us  as  a  theory,  we  become 
perfectly  cool  and  critical,  and  are  not  in  the  least  inclined  to 
be  indulgent  to  false  views  and  selfish  sentiments. 

Seeing  that  we  are  about  to  be  severe  on  Young's  failings 
and  failures,  we  ought,  if  a  reviewer's  space  were  elastic,  to 
dwell  also  on  his  merits — on  the  startling  vigor  of  his  imagery, 
on  the  occasional  grandeur  of  his  thought,  on  the  piquant 
force  of  that  grave  satire  into  which  his  meditations  contin- 
ually run.  But,  since  our  limits''  are  rigorous,  we  must 
content  ourselves  with  the  less  agreeable  half  of  the  critic's 
duty;  and  we  may  the  rather  do  so,  because  it  would  be  diffi- 
cult to  say  anything  new  of  Young  in  the  way  of  admiration, 
while  we  think  there  are  many  salutary  lessons  remaining  to 
be  drawn  from  his  faults. 

One  of  the  most  striking  characteristics  of  Young  is  his 
radical  insincerity  as  a  poetic  artist.  This,  added  to  the  thin 
and  artificial  texture  of  his  wit,  is  the  true  explanation  of  the 
paradox,  that  a  poet  who  is  often  inopportunely  witt}^  has 
the  opposite  vice  of  bombastic  absurdity.  The  source  of 
all  grandiloquence  is  the  want  of  taking  for  a  criterion  the 
true  qualities  of  the  object  described  or  the  emotion 
expressed.  The  grandiloquent  man  is  never  bent  on  saying 
what  he  feels  or  what  he  sees,  but  on  producing  a  certain 
effect  on  his  audience;  hence  he  may  float  away  into  utter 
inanity  without  meeting  any  criterion  to  arrest  him.  Here 
lies  the  distinction  between  grandiloquence  and  genuine 


34      WORLDLINESS  AND  OTHER  WORLDLINESS: 


fancy  or  bold  imaginativeness.  The  fantastic  or  the  boldly 
imaginative  poet  may  be  as  sincere  as  the  most  realistic ; 
he  is  true  to  his  own  sensibilities  or  inward  vision,  and  in 
his  wildest  flights  he  never  breaks  loose  from  his  criterion 
— the  truth  of  his  own  mental  state.  Now,  this  disruption 
of  language  from  genuine  thought  and  feeling  is  what  we 
are  constantly  detecting  in  Young;  and  his  insincerity  is 
the  more  likely  to  betray  him  into  absurdity,  because  he 
habitually  treats  of  abstractions,  and  not  of  concrete  objects 
or  specific  emotions.  ,He  descants  perpetually  on  virtue, 
religion,  ''the  good  man,"  life,  death,  immortality,  eternity — 
subjects  which  are  apt  to  give  a  factitious  grandeur  to  empty 
worldliness.  When  a  poet  floats  in  th6  empyrean,  and  only 
takes  a  bird's-eye  view  of  the  earth,  some  people  accept  the 
mere  fact  of  his  soaring  for  sublimity,  and  mistake  his  dim 
vision  of  earth  for  proximity  to  heaven.  Thus: 

"  His  hand  the  good  man  fixes  on  the  skies, 
And  bids  earth  roll,  nor  feels  her  idle  whirl," 

may  perhaps  pass  for  sublime  with  some  readers.  But  pause 
a  moment  to  realize  the  image,  and  the  monstrous  absurdity 
of  a  man's  grasping  the  skies,  and  hanging  habitually  sus- 
pended there,  while  he  contemptuously  bids  the  earth  roll, 
warns  you  that  no  genuine  feeling  could  have  suggested  so 
unnatural  a  conception. 

Examples  of  such  vicious  imagery,  resulting  from  insin- 
cerity, may  be  found,  perhaps,  in  almost  every  page  of  the 
"Night  Thoughts."  But  simple  assertions  or  aspirations, 
undisguised  by  imagery,  are  often  equally  false.  No  writer 
whose  rhetoric  was  checked  by  the  slightest  truthful  intentions 
could  have  said: 

"  An  eye  of  awe  and  wonder  let  me  roll, 
And  roll  forever." 

Abstracting  the  more  poetical  associations  with  the  eye,  this 
is  hardly  less  absurd  than  if  he  had  wished  to  stand  forever 
with  his  mouth  open. 
Again: 

*'  Far  beneath 
A  soul  immortal  is  a  mortal  joy." 

Happily  for  human  nature,  we  are  sure  no  man  really  believes 


THE  POET  YOUNG. 


3i 


that.  Which  of  us  has  the  impiety  not  to  feel  that  our  souls 
are  only  too  narrow  for  the  joy  of  looking  into  the  trusting 
eyes  of  our  children,  of  reposing  on  the  love  of  a  husband  or 
wife — nay,  of  listening  to  the  divine  voice  of  music,  or  watch- 
ing the  calm  brightness  of  autumn  afternoons  ?  But  Young 
could  utter  this  falsity  without  detecting  it,  because,  when  he 
spoke  of  "mortal  joy,"  he  rarely  had  in  his  mind  any  object 
to  which  he  could  attach  sacredness.  He  was  thinking  of 
bishoprics  and  benefices,  of  smiling  monarchs,  patronizing 
prime-ministers,  and  a  "much  indebted  muse."  Of  any 
thing  between  these  and  eternal  bliss  he  was  but  rarely 
and  moderately  conscious.  Often,  indeed,  he  sinks  very 
much  below  even  the  bishopric,  and  seems  to  have  no  notion 
of  earthly  pleasure  but  such  as  breathes  gaslight  and  the  fumes 
of  wine.  His  picture  of  life  is  precisely  such  as  you  would 
expect  from  a  man  who  has  risen  from  his  bed  at  two  o'clock 
in  the  afternoon  with  a  headache,  and  a  dim  remembrance 
that  he  has  added  to  his  "debts  of  honor:" 

"  What  wretched  repetition  cloys  us  here  ! 
What  periodic  potions  for  the  sick, 
Distemper' d  bodies,  and  distemper'd  minds!  " 

And  then  he  flies  off  to  his  usual  antithesis : 

"  In  an  eternity  what  scenes  shall  strike! 
Adventures  thicken,  novelties  surprise  I " 

"Earth"  means  lords  and  levees,  duchesses  and  DeHlahs, 
South-Sea  dreams  and  illegal  percentage ;  and  the  only  things 
distinctly  preferable  to  these  are,  eternity  and  the  stars. 
Deprive  Young  of  this  antithesis,  and  more  than  half  his 
eloquence  would  be  shrivelled  up.  Place  him  on  a  breezy 
common,  where  the  furze  is  in  its  golden  bloom,  where  chil- 
dren are  playing,  and  horses  are  standing  in  the  sunshine  with 
fondHng  necks,  and  he  would  have  nothing  to  say.  Here 
are  neither  depths  of  guilt  nor  heights  of  glory;  and  we 
doubt  whether,  in  such  a  scene,  he  would  be  able  to  pay  his 
usual  compliment  to  the  Creator: 

*•  Where'er  I  turn,  what  claim  on  all  applause ! " 

It  is  true  that  he  sometimes — not  often — speaks  of  virtue 
as  capable  of  sweetening  life,  as  well  as  of  taking  the  sting 


36      WORLDLINESS  AND  OTHER  WORLDLINESS: 


from  death  and  winning  heaven;  and,  lest  we  should  be 
guilty  of  any  unfairness  to  him,  we  will  quote  the  two 
passages  which  convey  this  sentiment  the  most  explicitly. 
In  the  one,  he  gives  Lorenzo  this  excellent  recipe  for  obtain- 
ing cheerfulness: 

"  Go,  fix  some  weighty  truth ; 
Chain  down  some  passion  ;  do  some  generous  good ; 
Teach  Ignorance  to  see,  or  Grief  to  smile  ; 
Correct  thy  friend  ;  befriend  thy  greatest  foe  ; 
Or,  with  warm  heart,  and  confidence  divine, 
Spring  up,  and  lay  strong  hold  on  Him  who  made  thee." 

The  other  passage  is  vague,  but  beautiful,  and  its  music 
has  murmured  in  our  minds  for  many  years : 

' '  The  cuckoo  seasons  sing 
The  same  dull  note  to  such  as  nothing  prize 
But  what  those  seasons  from  the  teeming  earth 
To  doting  sense  indulge.    But  nobler  minds, 
Which  rehsh  fruit  unripen'd  by  the  sun, 
Make  their  days  various  ;  various  as  the  dyes 
On  the  dove's  neck,  which  wanton  in  his  rays. 
On  minds  of  dove-Hke  innocence  possess' d, 
On  lighten'd  minds  that  bask  in  Virtue's  beams,  - 
Nothing  hangs  tedious,  nothing  old  revolves 
In  that  for  which  they  long,  for  which  they  live. 
•         Their  glorious  efforts,  wing'd  with  heavenly  hopes, 
Each  rising  morning  sees  still  higher  rise  ; 
Each  bounteous  dawn  its  novelty  presents 
To  worth  maturing,  new  strength,  lustre,  fame  ; 
While  Nature's  circle,  like  a  chariot  wheel. 
Rolling  beneath  their  elevated  aims. 
Makes  their  fair  prospect  fairer  every  hour; 
Advancing  virtue  in  a  line  to  bliss." 

Even  here,  where  he  is  in  his  most  amiable  mood,  you  see 
at  what  a  telescopic  distance  he  stands  from  mother  Earth 
and  simple  human  joys — "  Nature's  circle  rolls  beneath." 
Indeed,  we  remember  no  mind  in  poetic  literature  that  seems 
to  have  absorbed  less  of  the  beauty  and  the  healthy  breath 
of  the  common  landscape  than  Young's.  His  images,  often 
grand  and  finely  presented — witness  that  sublimely  sudden 
leap  of  thought, 

"Embryos  we  must  be  till  we  burst  the  shell. 
Yon  ambient  azure  shell,  and  spring  to  life**— 


THE  POET  YOUNG. 


37 


lie  almost  entirely  within  that  circle  of  observation  which 
would  be  familiar  to  a  man  who  lived  in  town,  hung  about 
the  theatres,  read  the  newspaper,  and  went  home  often  by- 
moon  and  star  light.  There  is  no  natural  object  nearer  than 
the  moon  that  seems  to  have  any  strong  attachment  for  him, 
and  even  to  the  moon  he  chiefly  appeals  for  patronage,  and 
pays  his  court"  to  her.  It  is  reckoned  among  the  many 
deficiencies  of  Lorenzo,  that  he  "  never  asked  the  moon  one 
question" — an  omission  which  Young  thinks  eminently 
unbecoming  a  rational  being.  He  describes  nothing  so  well 
as  a  comet,  and  is  tempted  to  linger  with  fond  detail  over 
nothing  more  familiar  than  the  day  of  judgment  and  an 
imaginary  journey  among  the  stars.  Once  on  Saturn's  ring, 
he  feels  at  home,  and  his  language  becomes  quite  easy: 

"What  behold  I  now? 
A  wilderness  of  wonders  burning  round, 
Where  larger  suns  inhabit  higher  spheres  ; 
Perhaps  the  villas  of  descending  gods 

It  is  like  a  sudden  relief  from  a  strained  posture  when,  in 
the  "  Night  Thoughts,"  we  come  on  any  allusion  that  carries 
us  to  the  lanes,  woods,  or  fields.  Such  allusions  are  amaz- 
ingly rare,  and  we  could  almost  count  them  on  a  single  hand. 
That  we  may  do  him  no  injustice,  we  will  quote  the  three 
best : 

"Like  blossom' d  trees  overturned  by  vernal  storm 
Lovely  in  death  the  beauteous  ruin  lay." 

¥:  'k  *  ¥:  * 

**  In  the  same  brook  none  ever  bathed  him  twice  : 
To  the  same  life  none  ever  twice  awoke, 
We  call  the  brook  the  same — the  same  we  think 
Our  life,  though  still  more  rapid  in  its  flow  ; 
Nor  mark  the  much  irrevocably  lapsed. 
And  mingled  with  the  sea." 

*  -Sf  •x-  *  * 

"  The  crown  of  manhood  is  a  winter  joy  ; 
An  evergreen  that  stands  the  northern  blast,"  j 
And  blossoms  in  the  rigor  of  our  fate." 

The  adherence  to  abstractions,  or  to  the  personification  of 


38      WORLDLINESS  AND  OTHER   WORLD  LI  NESS; 

abstractions,  is  closely  allied  in  Young  to  the  want  of  genuine 
emotion.  He  sees  Virtue  sitting  on  a  mount  serene,  far 
above  the  mists  and  storms  of  earth:  he  sees  Religion  com- 
ing down  from  the  skies,  with  this  world  in  her  left  hand  and 
the  other  world  in  her  right :  but  we  never  find  him  dwelling 
on  virtue  or  religion  as  it  really  exists — in  the  emotions  of  a 
man  dressed  in  an  ordinary  coat,  and  seated  by  his  fireside 
of  an  evening,  with  his  hand  resting  on  the  head  of  his  little 
daughter;  in  courageous  effort  for  unselfish  ends,  in  the  inter- 
nal triumph  of  justice  and  pity  over  personal  resentment,  in 
all  the  sublime  self-renunciation  and  sweet  charities  which 
are  found  in  the  details  of  ordinary  life.  Now,  emotion  links 
itself  with  particulars,  and  only  in  a  faint  and  secondary 
manner  with  abstractions.  An  orator  may  discourse  very 
eloquently  on  injustice  in  general,  and  leave  his  audience  cold; 
but  let  him  state  a  special  case  of  oppression,  and  every  heart 
will  throb.  The  most  untheoretic  persons  are  aware  of  this 
relation  between  true  emotion  and  particular  facts,  as  opposed 
to  general  terms,  and  implicitly  recognize  it  in  the  repul- 
sion they  feel  toward  any  one  who  professes  strong  feeling 
about  abstractions — in  the  interjectional  "humbug!"  which 
immediately  rises  to  their  lips. 

If  we  except  the  passages  in  Philander,  Narcissa,  and 
Lucia,  there  is  hardly  a  trace  of  human  sympathy,  of  self- 
forgetfulness,  in  the  joy  or  sorrow  of  a  fellow-being,  through- 
out this  long  poem,  which  professes  to  treat  the  various  phases 
of  man's  destiny.  And  even  in  the  Narcissa  Night,  Young 
repels  us  by  the  low  moral  tone  of  his  exaggerated  lament. 
This  married  step-daughter  died  at  Lyons,  and,  being  a 
Protestant,  was  denied  burial,  so  that  her  friends  had  to  bury 
her  in  secret — one  of  the  many  miserable  results  of  super- 
stition, but  not  a  fact  to  throw  an  educated,  still  less  a  Chris- 
tian man  into  a  fury  of  hatred  and  vengeance  in  contempla- 
ting it  after  the  lapse  of  five  years.  Young,  however,  takes 
great  pains  to  simulate  a  bad  feeling : 

"Of  grief 

And  indignation  rival  bursts  I  pout'd, 
Half  execration  mingled  with  my  pray'r  ; 
Kindled  at  man,  while  I  his  God  ador'd  ; 
Sore  grudg'd  the  savage  land  her  sacred  dust ; 
Stamp'd  the  cursed  soil ;  and  with  humanity 
{Denied  Narcissa)  wish' d  them  all  a  grave.'' 


THE  POET  YOUNG. 


39 


The  odiously  bad  taste  of  this  last  clause  makes  us  hope  that 
it  is  simply  a  platitude,  and  not  intended  as  a  witticism,  until 
he  removes  the  possibility  of  this  favorable  doubt  by  imme- 
diately asking,  "Flows  my  resentment  into  guilt?" 

When,  by  an  after-thought,  he  attempts  something  like 
sympathy-,  he  only  betrays  more  clearly  his  want  of  it.  Thus, 
in  the  first  Night,  when  he  turns  from  his  private  griefs  to 
depict  earth  as  a  hideous  abode  of  misery  for  all  mankind, 
and  asks, 

"What  then  am  I,  who  sorrow  for  myself?" 

he  falls  at  once  into  calculating  the  benefit  of  sorrowing  for 
others : 

"More  generous  sorrow,  while  it  sinks,  exalts; 

And  conscious  virtue  mitigates  the  pang. 
Nor  virtue,  more  than  prudence,  bids  me  give 
Swollen  thought  a  second  channel. ' ' 

This  remarkable  negation  of  sympathy  is  in  perfect  consis- 
tency with  Young's  theory  of  ethics  : 

*'  Virtue  is  a  crime, 
A  crime  to  reason,  if  it  costs  us  pain 
Unpaid. ' ' 

If  there  is  no  immortality  for  man, 

"Sense  !  take  the  rein  ;  blind  Passon,  drive  us  on 
And  Ignorance  !  befriend  us  on  our  way.  .  .  . 
Yes  ;  give  the  pulse  full  empire  ;  live  the  Brute, 
Since  as  the  brute  we  die.    The  sum  of  man, 
Of  godlike  man,  to  revel  and  to  rot." 

*  *  *  -x-  -x- 

"  If  this  life's  gain  invites  him  to  the  deed, 
Why  not  his  country  sold,  his  father  slain  ?  " 

*  *  *         *  * 

"Ambition,  avarice,  by  the  wise  disdain'd, 
Is  perfect  wisdom,  while  mankind  are  fools, 
And  think  a  turf  or  tombstone  covers  all. '  * 


40     WORLDLINESS  AND  OTHER  WO RLDLINESS : 


"  Die  for  thy  country,  thou  romantic  fool ! 
Seize,  the  plank  thyself,  and  let  her  sink." 

*  *  4r  *  * 

"  As  in  the  dying  parent  dies  the  child, 

Virtue  with  Immortality  expires. 

Who  tells  me  he  denies  his  soul  immortal, 
Whate  er  his  boast,  has  told  me  hes  a  knave. 
His  duty  'tis  to  love  himself  alone. 
Nor  care  though  mankind  perish,  if  he  smiles. 

We  can  imagine  the  man  who  denies  his  soul  immortal " 
replying,  It  is  quite  possible  that  you  would  be  a  knave, 
and  love  yourself  alone,  if  it  were  not  for  your  belief  in 
immortality ;  but  you  are  not  to  force  upon  me  what  would 
result  from  your  own  utter  want  of  moral  emotion.  I  am 
just  and  honest,  not  because  I  expect  to  live  in  another  world, 
but  because,  having  felt  the  pain  of  injustice  and  dishonesty 
towards  myself,  I  have  a  fellow-feeHng  with  other  men, 
who  would  suffer  the  same  pain  if  I  were  unjust  or  dishonest 
towards  them.  Why  should  I  give  my  neighbor  short 
weight  in  this  world  because  there  is  not  another  world  in 
which  I  should  have  nothing  to  weigh  out  to  him  ?  I  am 
honest,  because  I  don't  like  to  inflict  evil  on  others 
in  this  life,  not  because  I'm  afraid  of  evil  to  myself 
in  another.  The  fact  is,  I  do  not  love  myself  alone, 
whatever  logical  necessity  there  may  be  for  that 
conclusion  in  your  mind.  I  have  a  tender  love  for 
my  wife  and  chidren  and  friends,  and  through  that  love  I 
sympathize  with  like  affections  in  other  men.  It  is  a  pang  to 
me  to  witness  the  suffering  of  a  fellow-being,  and  I  feel  his 
suffering  the  more  acutely  because  he  is  mortal — because  his 
life  is  so  short,  and  I  would  have  it,  if  possible,  filled  with 
happiness  and  not  misery.  Through  my  union  and  fellowship 
with  the  men  and  women  I  have  seen,  I  feel  a  like,  though  a 
fainter,  sympathy  with  those  I  have  not  seen ;  and  I  am  able 
so  to  live  in  imagination  with  the  generations  to  come,  that 
their  good  is  not  alien  to  me,  and  is  a  stimulus  to  me  to  labor 
for  ends  which  may  not  benefit  myself,  but  will  benefit  them. 
It  is  possible  that  you  might  prefer  to  'live  the  brute,'  to  sell 
your  country,  or  to  slay  your  father,  if  you  Avere  not  afraid 
of  some  disagreeable  consequences  from  the  criminal  laws  of 
another  world ;  but  even  if  I  could  conceive  no  motive  but 


THE  POET  YOUNG. 


41 


my  own  worldly  interest  or  the  gratification  of  my  animal 
desires,  I  have  not  observed  that  beastliness,  treachery,  and 
parricide  are  the  direct  way  to  happiness  and  comfort  on 
earth." 

Thus  far  the  man  who  "denies  himself  immortal"  might 
give  a  warrantable  reply  to  Young's  assumption  of  peculiar 
loftiness  in  maintaining  that  "virtue  with  immortality 
expires."  We  may  admit,  indeed,  that  if  the  better  part  of 
virtue  consists,  as  Young  appears  to  think,  in  contempt  for 
mortal  joys,  in  "meditation  of  our  ov/n  decease,"  and  in 
"  applause ''  of  God  in  the  style  of  a  congratulatory  address 
to  her  majesty — all  which  has  small  relation  to  the  well-being 
of  mankind  on  this  earth — the  motive  to  it  must  be  gathered 
from  something  that  lies  quite  outside  the  sphere  of  human 
sympathy.  But,  for  certain  other  elements  of  virtue,  which 
are  of  more  obvious  importance  to  plain  people — a  delicate 
sense  of  our  neighbor's  -rights,  an  active  participation  in  the 
joys  and  sorrows  of  our  fellow-men,  a  magnanimous  accep- 
tance of  privation  or  suffering  for  ourselves  when  it  is  the 
condition  of  rescue  for  others — in  a  word,  the  widening  and 
strengthening  of  our  sympathetic  nature — it  is  surely  of  some 
moment  to  contend  that  they  have  no  more  direct  depend- 
ence on  the  belief  in  a  future  state  than  the  interchange  of 
gases  in  the  lungs  on  the  plurality  of  worlds.  Nay,  it  is  con- 
ceivable that  in  some  minds  the  deep  pathos  lying  in  the 
thought  of  human  mortality — that  we  are  here  for  a  little 
while  and  then  vanish  away,  that  this  earthly  life  is  all  that 
is  given  to  our  loved  ones  and  to  our  many  suffering  fellow- 
men,  lies  nearer  the  fountains  of  moral  emotion  than  the 
conception  of  extended  existence.  And  surely  it  ought  to  be 
a  welcome  fact,  if  the  thought  of  mortality,  as  well  as  of 
immortality,  be  favorable  to  virtue.  We  can  imagine  that 
the  proprietors  of  a  patent  water-supply  may  have  a  dread  of 
common  springs ;  but  for  those  who  only  share  the  general 
need  there  cannot  be  too  great  a  security  against  a  lack  of 
fresh  water,  or  of  pure  morality.  It  should  be  matter  of 
unmixed  rejoicing  if  this  latter  neccessary  of  healthful  life  has 
its  evolution  insured  in  the  interaction  of  human  souls  as  cer- 
tainly as  the  evolution  of  science  or  of  art,  with  which,  indeed,  it 
it  is  but  a  twin  ray,  melting  into  them  with  undefinable  limits. 

To  return  to  Young.  We  can  often  detect  a  man's  defi- 
ciencies in  what  he  admires  more  clearly  than  in  what  he  con- 


42 


WORLDLINESS AND  OTHER  WORLDLINESS: 


temns,  in  the  sentiments  he  presents  as  laudable  rather  than 
in  those  he  decries.  And  in  Young's  notion  of  what  is  lofty 
he  casts  a  shadow  by  which  we  can  measure  him  without 
further  trouble.  For  example,  in  arguing  for  human  immor- 
tality, he  says : 

"  First,  what  is  true  ambition  f    The  pursuit 
Of  glory  nothing  less  than  man  can  share. 

*         *         *         *  * 

The  Visible  and  Present  are  for  brutes, 
A  slender  portion,  and  a  narrow  bound  ! 
These  Reason,  with  an  energy  divine 
O'erleaps,  and  claims  the  Future  and  Unseen ; 
The  vast  Unseen,  the  Future  fathomless  ! 
When  the  great  soul  buoys  up  to  this  high  point. 
Leaving  gross  Nature's  sediments  below, 
Then,  and  then  only,  Adam's  offspring  quits 
The  sage  and  hero  of  the  fields  and  woods, 
Asserts  his  rank,  and  rises  into  man." 

So,  then,  if  it  were  certified  that,  as  some  benevolent 
minds  have  tried  to  infer,  our  dumb  fellow-creatures  would 
share  a  future  existence,  in  which  it  is  to  be  hoped  we  should 
neither  beat,  starve,  nor  maim  them,  our  ambition  for  a 
future  life  would  cease  to  be  "lofty"  !  This  is  a  notion  of 
loftiness  which  may  pair  off  with  Dr.  Whewell's  celebrated 
observation,  that  Bentham's  moral  theory  is  low  because  it 
includes  justice  and  mercy  to  brutes. 

But,  for  a  reflection  of  Young's  moral  personality  on  a 
colossal  scale,  we  must  turn  to  those  passages  where  his 
rhetoric  is  at  its  utmost  stretch  of  inflation — where  he 
addresses  the  Deity,  discourses  of  the  Divine  operations, 
or  describes  the  last  judgment.  As  a  compound  of  vulgar 
pomp,  crawling  adulation,  and  hard  selfishness,  presented 
under  the  guise  of  piety,  there  are  few  things  in  literature  to 
surpass  the  ninth  Night,  entitled  "Consolation,"  especially 
in  the  pages  where  he  describes  the  last  judgment — a 
subject  to  which,  with  naive  self-betrayal,  he  applies 
phraseology  favored  by  the  exuberant  penny-a-liner.  Thus, 
when  God  descends,  and  the  groans  of  hell  are  opposed  by 
"shouts  of  joy,"  much  as  cheers  and  groans  contend  at  a 
public  meeting  where  the  resolutions  are  not  passed 
unanimously,  the  poet  completes  his  climax  in  this  way : 


TBE  POET  YOUNG. 


43 


**  Hence,  in  one  peal  of  loud,  eternal  praise, 
The  charmed  spectators  thunder  their  applause." 

In  the  same  taste,  he  sings, 

"Eternity,  the  various  sentence  past, 
Assigns  the  sever' d  throng  distinct  abodes. 
Sulphureous  or  ambrosial^ 

Exquisite  delicacy  of  indication!  He  is  too  nice  to  be  speci- 
fic as  to  the  interior  of  the  "sulphureous  "  abode;  but  when 
once  half  the  human  race  are  shut  up  there,  hear  how  he 
enjoys  turning  the  key  on  them ! 

"What  ensues? 
The  deed  predominant,  the  deed  of  deeds  ! 
Which  makes  a  hell  of  hell,  a  heaven  of  heaven. 
The  goddess,  with  determined  aspect,  turns 
Her  adamantine  key's  enormous  size 
Through  Destiny's  inextricable  wards, 
Deep  driving  every  bolt  on  both  their  fates. 
Then,  from  the  crystal  battlements  of  heaven, 
Down,  down  she  hurls  it  through  the  dark  profound, 
Ten  thousand,  thousand  fathoms ;  there  to  rust 
And  ne'er  unlock  her  resolution  more. 
The  deep  resounds ;  and  Hell,  through  all  her  glooms, 
Returns,  in  groans,  the  melancholy  roar." 

This  is  one  of  the  blessings  for  which  Dr.  Young  thanks 
God  ^< most": 

"  For  all  I  bless  Thee,  most,  for  the  severe  ; 
Her  death — my  own  at  hand — the  fiery  gulf. 
That  flaming  bound,  of  wrath  omnipotent  I 
It  thunders  ;  but  it  thunders  to  preserve  ; 
.    .    .    .        .    .    its  wholesome  dread 

Averts  the  dreaded  pain  ;  its  hideous  groans 
Join  Heaven  s  sweet  Hallelujahs  in  thy  praise, 
Great  Source  of  good  alone  !    How  kind  in  all ! 
In  vengeance  kind  !    Pain,  Death,  Gehenna,  j^z?/^  "  .  .  . 

^.  e.,  save  me^  Dr.  Young,  who,  in  return  for  that  favor,  pro- 
mise to  give  my  divine  patron  the  monopoly  of  that  exuber- 
ance in  laudatory  epithet  of  which  specimens  may  be  seen 
at  any  moment  in  a  large  number  of  dedications  and  odes  to 
kings,  queens,  prime-ministers,  and  other  persons  of  distinc- 
tion. That,  in  Young's  conception,  is  what  God  delights  in. 
His  crowning  aim  in  the  ''drama"  of  the  ages  is  to  vindi- 
cate his  own  renown.    The  God  of  the  ''Night  Thoughts" 


44       WORLDLINESS  AND  OTHER  WORLDLINESS: 


is  simply  Young  himself  "writ  large" — a  didactic  poet,  who 
♦lectures"  mankind  in  the  antithetic  hyperbole  of  mortal 
and  immortal  joys,  earth  and  the  stars,  hell  and  heaven ;  and 
expects  the  tribute  of  inexhaustible  "applause."  Young  has 
no  conception  of  religion  as  anything  else  than  egoism  turned 
heavenward;  and  he  does  not  merely  imply  this,  he  insists 
on  it.  Religion;  he  tells  us,  in  argumentative  passages  too 
long  to  quote,  is  "ambition,  pleasure,  and  the  love  of  gain," 
directed  towards  the  joys  of  the  future  life  instead  of  the  pres- 
ent. And  his  ethics  correspond  to  his  religion.  He  vacil- 
lates, indeed,  in  his  ethical  theory,  and  shifts  his  position  in 
order  to  suit  his  immediate  purpose  in  argument;  but  he 
never  changes  his  level  so  as  to  see  beyond  the  horizon  of 
mere  selfishness.  Sometimes  he  insists,  as  we  have  seen, 
that  the  belief  in  a  future  liie  is  the  only  basis  of  moraHty; 
but  elsewhere  he  tells  us— ^ 

"  In  self-applause  is  virtue's  golden  prize." 

Virtue,  with  Young,  must  always  squint — must  never  look 
straight  towards  the  immediate  object  of  its  emotion  and 
effort.  Thus,  if  a  man  risks  perishing  in  the  snow  himself 
rather  than  forsake  a  weaker  comrade,  he  must  either  do  this 
because  his  hopes  and  fears  are  directed  to  another  world,  or 
because  he  desires  to  applaud  himself  afterwards !  Young,  if 
we  may  believe  him,  would  despise  the  action  as  folly  unless 
it  had  tnese  motives.  Let  us  hope  he  was  not  so  bad  as  he 
pretended  to  be!  The  tides  of  the  divine  life  in  man  move 
under  the  thickest  ice  of  theory. 

Another  indication  of  Young's  deficiency  in  moral,  i.  e.y 
in  sympathetic  emotion,  is  his  unintermitting  habit  of  peda- 
gogic moralizing.  On  its  theoretic  and  perceptive  side.  Mor- 
ality touches  Science;  on  its  emotional  side,  poetic  Art. 
Now,  the  products  of  poetic  Art  are  great  in  proportion  as 
they  result  from  the  immediate  prompting  of  innate  power, 
and  not  from  labored  obedience  to  a  theory  or  rule  ;  and  the 
presence  of  genius  or  innate  prompting  is  directly  opposed 
to  the  perpetual  consciousness  of  a  rule.  The  action  of  fac- 
ulty is  imperious,  and  supersedes  the  reflection  why  it  should 
act.  In  the  same  way,  in  proportion  as  morality  is  emotional 
it  will  exhibit  itself  in  direct  sympathetic  feeling  and  action,, 
and  not  as  the  recognition  of  a  rule.  Love  does  not  say^ 
"I  ought  to  love" — it  loves.    Pity  does  not  say,  "It  is 


THE  POET  YOUNG. 


45 


right  to  be  pitiful" — it  pities.  Justice  does  not  say,  "I  am 
bound  to  be  just" — it  feels  justly.  It  is  only  where  moral 
emotion  is  comparatively  weak  that  the  contemplation  of 
a  rule  or  theory  habitually  mingles  with  its  action;  and, 
in  accordance  with  this,  we  think  experience,  both  in  liter- 
ature and  life,  has  shown  that  the  minds  which  are  pre- 
dominantly didactic  are  deficient  in  sympathetic  emotion. 
A  man  who  is  perpetually  thinking  in  monitory  apothegms, 
who  has  an  unintermittent  flux  of  rebuke,  can  have  little 
energy  left  for  simple  feeling.  And  this  is  the  case  with 
Young.  In  his  highest  flights  of  contemplation,  and  his 
most  wailing  soliloquies,  he  interrupts  himself  to  fling  an 
admonitory  parenthesis  at  Lorenzo,  or  to  hint  that 
"folly's  creed"  is  the  reverse  of  his  own.  Before  his 
thoughts  can  flow,  he  must  fix  his  eye  on  an  imaginary 
miscreant,  who  gives  unhmited  scope  for  lecturing,  and 
recriminates  just  enough  to  keep  the  spring  of  admonition 
and  argument  going  to  the  extent  of  nine  books.  It  is 
curious  to  see  how  this  pedagogic  habit  of  mind  runs 
through  Young's  contemplation  of  Nature.  As  the  ten- 
dency to  see  our  own  sadness  reflected  in  the  external 
world  has  been  called  by  Mr.  Ruskin  the  pathetic  fallacy," 
so  we  may  call  Young's  disposition  to  see  a  rebuke  or  a 
warning  in  every  natural  object  the  pedagogic  fallacy."  To 
his  mind,  the  heavens  are  forever  ^<:^?/<iz>/^  as  they  shine; " 
and  the  great  function  of  the  stars  is  to  be  a  "  lecture  to 
mankind."  The  conception  of  the  Deity  as  a  didactic  author 
is  not  merely  an  implicit  point  of  view  with  him  ;  he  works 
it  out  in  elaborate  imagery,  and  at  length  makes  it  the  occa- 
sion of  his  most  extraordinary  achievement  in  the  "art  of 
sinking,'^'  by  exclaiming — a  propos^  we  need  hardly  say,  of 
the  nocturnal  heavens — 

"  Divine  Instructor !    Thy  first  volume  this 
For  man's  perusal !    All  in  capitals  ! ' ' 

It  is  this  pedagogic  tendency,  this  sermonizing  attitude  of 
Young's  mind,  which  produces  the  wearisome  monotony  of 
his  pauses.  After  the  first  two  or  three  Nights,  he  is  rarely 
singing,  rarely  pouring  forth  any  continuous  melody  inspired 
by  the  spontaneous  flow  of  thought  or  feeling.  He  is  rather 
occupied  with  argumentative  insistence,  with  hammering  in 
the  proofs  of  his  propositions  by  disconnected  verses,  which 


46       WORLDLINESS  AND  O  THER  WORLDL INESS: 


he  puts  down  at  intervals.  The  perpetual  recurrence  of  the 
pause  at  the  end  of  the  line  throughout  long  passages  makes 
them  as  fatiguing  to  the  ear  as  a  monotonous  chant,  which 
consists  of  the  endless  repetition  of  one  short  musical  phrase. 
For  example : 

"Past  hours, 
If  not  by  guilt,  yet  wound  us  by  their  flight. 
If  folly  bound  our  prospect  by  the  grave. 
All  feeling  of  futurity  be  numb'd, 
All  godlike  passion  for  eternals  quench' d, 
All  relish  of  realities  expired; 
Renounced  all  correspondence  with  the  skies; 
Our  freedom  chain'd  ;  quite  wingless  our  desire  ; 
In  sense  dark-prison'd  all  that  ought  to  soar  ; 
Prone  to  the  center  ;  crawling  in  the  dust  ; 
Dismounted  every  great  and  glorious  aim  ; 
Enthralled  every  faculty  divine, 
Heart-buried  in  the  rubbish  of  the  world." 

How  different  from  the  easy,  graceful  melody  of  Cowper's 
blank  verse !  Indeed,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  criticise  Young 
without  being  reminded  at  every  step  of  the  contrast  presen- 
ted to  him  by  Cowper.  And  this  contrast  urges  itself  upon 
us  the  more  frorri  the  fact  that  there  is,  to  a  certain  extent,  a 
parallelism  between  the  "Night  Thoughts"  and  the  "Task." 
In  both  poems,  the  author  achieves  his  greatest  in  virtue  of 
the  new  freedom  conferred  by  blank  verse ;  both  poems  are 
professedly  didactic,  and  mingle  much  satire  with  their 
graver  meditations;  both  poems  are  the  productions  of 
men  whose  estimate  of  this  Hfe  was  formed  by  the  light 
of  a  belief  in  immortality,  and  who  were  intensely  attached 
to  Christianity.  On  some  grounds,  we  might  have  anticipa- 
ted a  more  morbid  view  of  things  from  Cowper  than  from 
Young.  Cowper's  religion  was  dogmatically  the  more 
gloomy,  for  he  was  a  Calvinist;  while  Young  was  a  "low'' 
Arminian,  believing  that  Christ  died  for  all,  and  that  the 
only  obstacle  to  any  man's  salvation  lay  in  his  will,  which 
he  could  change  if  he  chose.  There  was  deep  and  unusual 
sadness  involved  in  Cowper's  personal  lot ;  while  Young, 
apart  from  his  ambitious  and  greedy  discontent,  seems  to 
have  had  no  exceptional  sorrow. 

Yet  see  how  a  lovely,  sympathetic  nature  manifests  itself 
in  spite  of  creed  and  circumstance  !  Where  is  the  poem  that 
surpasses  the  "Task"  in  the  genuine  love  it  breathes,  at  once 


THE  POET  YOUNG. 


47 


towards  inanimate  and  animate  existence — in  truthfulness  of 
perception  and  sincerity  of  presentation — in  the  calm  gladness 
that  springs  from  a  delight  in  objects  for  their  own  sake,  with- 
out self-reference — in  divine  sympathy  with  the  lowliest  plea- 
sures, with  the  most  short-lived  capacity  for  pain  ?  Here  is  no 
railing  at  the  earth's  "  melancholy  map,"  but  the  happiest  ling- 
ering over  her  simplest  scenes  with  all  the  fond  minuteness 
of  attention  that  belongs  to  love ;  no  pompous  rhetoric  about 
the  inferiority  of  the  brutes,"  but  a  warm  plea  on  their  behalf 
against  man's  inconsiderateness  and  cruelty,  and  a  sense  of 
enlarged  happiness  from  their  companionship  in  enjoyment; 
no  vague  rant  about  human  misery  and  human  virtue,  but 
that  close  and  vivid  presentation  of  particular  sorrows  and 
privations,  of  particular  deeds  and  misdeeds,  which  is  the 
direct  road  to  the  emotions.  How  Cowper's  exquisite  mind 
falls  with  the  mild  warmth  of  morning  sunlight  on  the  com- 
monest objects,  at  once  disclosing  every  detail  and  investing 
every  detail  with  beauty !  No  object  is  too  small  to  prompt 
his  song — not  the  sooty  film  on  the  bars,  or  the  spoutless  tea- 
pot holding  a  bit  of  mignonette  that  serves  to  cheer  the  dingy 
town-lodging  with  a ''hint  that  Nature  lives;"  and  yet  his 
song  is  never  trival,  for  he  is  alive  to  small  objects,  not  because 
his  mind  is  narrow,  but  because  his  glance  is  clear  and  his 
heart  is  large.  Instead  of  trying  to  edify  us  by  supercilious 
allusions  to  the  "brutes"  and  the  "stalls,"  he  interests  us  in 
that  tragedy  of  the  hen-roost  when  the  thief  has  wrenched 
the  poor — 

"  Where  Chanticleer  amidst  his  harem  sleeps 
In  unsuspecting  pomp  ;  " 

in  the  patient  cattle,  that  on  the  winter's  morning 

"  Mourn  in  corners  where  the  fence 
Screens  them,  and  seem  half  petrified  to  sleep 
In  unrecu7nbent  sadness  ;  " 

in  the  little  squirrel,  that,  surprised  by  him  in  his  wood-land 
walk, 

"  At  once,  swift  as  a  bird, 
Ascends  the  neighboring  beech  ;  there  whisks  his  brush, 
And  perks  his  ears,  and  stamps,  and  cries  aloud, 
With  all  the  prettiness  of  feigned  alarm 
And  anger  insignificantly  fierce." 


48      WORLDLINESS  And  OTHER  WORLDLINESS: 


And  then  he  passes  into  reflection,  not  with  curt  apothegm 
and  snappish  reproof,  but  with  that  melodious  flow  of  utter- 
ance which  belongs  to  thought  when  it  is  carried  in  a  stream 
of  feehng: 

"  The  heart  is  hard  in  nature,  and  unfit 
For  human  fellowship,  as  being  void 
Of  sympathy,  and  therefore  dead  alike 
To  love  and  friendship  both,  that  is  not  pleased 
With  sight  of  animals  enjoying  life, 
Nor  feels  their  happiness  augment  his  own." 

His  large  and  tender  heart  embraces  the  most  every -day 
forms  of  human  life  ;  the  carter  driving  his  team  through  the 
wintry  storm;  the  cottager's  wife  who,  painfully  nursing  the 
embers  on  her  hearth,  while  her  infants  '*sit  cowering  o'er 
the  sparks," 

"Retires,  content  to  quake,  so  they  be  warmed;  " 

or  the  villager,  with  her  little  ones,  going  out  to  pick 

"A  cheap  but  wholesome  salad  from  the  brook  ;" 

and  he  compels  our  colder  natures  to  follow  his  in  its  mani- 
fold sympathies,  not  by  exhortations,  not  by  telling  us  to 
meditate  at  midnight,  to  "indulge  "  the  thought  of  death,  or 
to  ask  ourselves  how  we  shall  weather  an  eternal  night,"  but 
by  presenting  to  us  the  object  of  his  compassion  truthfully  and 
lovingly.  And  when  he  handles  greater  themes,  when  he 
takes  a  wider  survey,  and  considers  the  men  or  the  deeds 
which  have  a  direct  influence  on  the  welfare  of  communities 
and  nations,  there  is  the  same  unselfish  warmth  of  feeling, 
the  same  scrupulous  truthfulness.  He  is  never  vague  in  his 
remonstrance  or  his  satire;  but  puts  his  finger  on  some  par- 
t'cular  vice  or  folly,  which  excites  his  indignation  or  "  dis- 
s  )lves  his  heart  in  pity,"  because  of  some  specific  injury  it 
does  to  his  fellow-man  or  to  a  sacred  cause.  And  when  he 
is  asked  why  he  interests  himself  about  the  sorrows  and 
wrongs  of  others,  hear  what  is  the  reason  he  gives.  Not,  like 
Young,  that  the  movements  of  the  planets  show  a  mutual 
dependence,  and  that 

"Thus  man  his  sovereign  duty  learns  in  this 
Material  picture  of  benevolence  ;  " — 

or  that — 


THE  POET  YO UNG. 


49 


**More  generous  sorrow  while  it  sinks,  exalts, 
And  conscious  virtue  mitigates  the  pang. 

What  is  Cowper's  answef,  when  he  imagines  some  "sage, 
erudite,  profound,"  asking  him,  "What's  the  world  to  you  ? " 

"  Much.    I  was  born  of  woman,  and  drew  milk 
As  sweet  as  charity  from  human  breasts. 
I  think,  articulate,  I  laugh  and  weep. 
And  exercise  all  functions  of  a  man. 
How  then  should  I  and  any  man  that  lives 
Be  strangers  to  each  other?  " 

Young  is  astonished  that  men  can  make  war  on  each  other 
— that  any  one  can  "seize  his  brother's  throat,"  while 

"The  Planets  cry,  '  Forbear.'  " 

Cowper  weeps  because —  ' 

•  There  is  no  flesh  in  man's  obdurate  heart : 
//  does  not  feel  for  man. ' ' 

Young  applauds  God  as  a  monarch  with  an  empire  and  a 
court  quite  superior  to  the  English,  or  as  an  author  who  pro- 
duces "volumes  for  man's  perusal."  Cowper  sees  his 
Father's  love  in  all  the  gentle  pleasures  of  the  home  fireside, 
in  the  charms  even  of  the  wintry  landscape,  and  thinks — 

"  Happy  who  walks  with  him  !    Whom  what  he  finds 
Of  flavor  or  of  scent  in  fruit  or  flower, 
Or  what  he  views  of  beautiful  or  grand 
In  nature,  from  the  broad  majestic  oak 
To  the  green  blade  that  twinkles  in  the  sun 
Prompts  with  reinembrance  of  a  present  God'^ 

To  conclude,  for  we  must  arrest  ourselves  in  a  contrast 
that  would  lead  us  beyond  our  bounds:  Young  flies  for  his 
utmost  consolation  to  the  day  of  judgment,  when 

"  Final  Ruin  fiercely  drives 
Her  ploughshare  o'er  Creation  ;" 

when  earth,  stars,  and  suns  are  swept  aside — 

"  And  now,  all  dross  removed,  Heaven's  own  pure  day 
Full  on  the  confines  of  our  ether,  flames  : 
While  (dreadful  contrast !)  far  (how  far!)  beneath, 
Hell,  bursting,  belches  forth  her  blazing  seas, 


50     WORLDLTNESS  AND  OTHER  WORLDLINESS : 


And  storms  sulphureous ;  her  voracious  jaws 
Expanding  wide,  and  roaring  for  her  prey," — 

Dr.  Young,  and  similar  ''ornaments  of  religion  and  virtue," 
passing,  of  course,  with  grateful  "applause"  into  the  upper 
region.  Cowper  finds  his  highest  inspiration  in  the  Mille- 
nium— in  the  restoration  of  this  our  beloved  home  of  earth 
to  perfect  holiness  and  bliss,  when  the  Supreme 

"  Shall  visit  earth  in  mercy  ;  shall  descend 
Propitious  in  His  chariot  paved  with  love; 
And  what  His  storms  have  blasted  and  defaced 
For  man's  revolt,  shall  with  a  smile  repair." 

And  into  what  delicious  melody  his  song  flows  at  the  thought 
of  that  blessedness  to  be  enjoyed  by  future  generations  on 
earth  ! — 

"  The  dwellers  in  the  vales  and  on  the  rocks 
Shout  to  each  other,  and  the  mountain-tops 
From  distant  mountains  catch  the  flying  joy  ; 
Till,  nation  after  nation  taught  the  strain. 
Earth  rolls  the  rapturous  Hosanna  round?" 

The  sum  of  our  comparison  is  this :  In  Young  we  have 
the  type  of  that  deficient  human  sympathy,  that  impiety 
towards  the  present  and  the  visible,  which  flies  for  its  motives, 
its  sanctities,  and  its  religion,  to  the  remote,  the  vague,  and 
the  unknown ;  in  Cowper  we  have  the  type  of  that  genuine 
love  which  cherishes  things  in  proportion  to  their  nearness, 
and  feels  its  revernece  grow  in  proportion  to  the  intimacy  of 
its  knowledge. 


GERMAN  WIT:  HEmRICH  HEINE. 


"Nothing,"  says  Goethe,  "is  more  significant  of  men's 
character  than  what  they  find  laughable."    The  truth  of  this 
observation  would  perhaps  have  been  more  apparent  if  he 
had  said  culture  instead  of  character.   The  last  thing  in  which 
the  cultivated  man  can  have  community  with  the  vulgar  is 
their  jocularity ;  and  we  can  hardly  exhibit  more  strikingly 
the  wide  gulf  which  separates  him  from  them  than  by  com- 
paring the  object  which  shakes  the  diaphragm  of  a  coal- 
heaver  with  the  highly  complex  pleasure  derived  from  a  real 
witticism.    That  any  high  order  of  wit  is  exceedingly  com- 
plex, and  demands  a  ripe  and  strong  mental  development, 
has  one  evidence  in  the  fact  that  we  do  not  find  it  in  boys 
at  all  in  proportion  to  their  manifestation  of  other  powers. 
Clever  boys  generally  aspire  to  the  heroic  and  poetic  rather 
than  the  comic,  and  the  crudest  of  all  their  efforts  are  their 
jokes.    Many  a  witty  man  will  remember  how,  in  his  school- 
days, a  practical  joke,  more  or  less  Rabelaisian,  was  for  him 
the  ne  plus  ultra  of  the  ludicrous.    It  seems  to  have  been  the 
same  with  the  boyhood  of  mankind.    The  fun  of  early  races 
was,  we  fancy,  of  the  after-dinner  kind — loud-throated  laugh- 
ter over  the  wine-cup,  taken  too  little  account  of  in  sober 
moments  to  enter  as  an  element  into  their  Art,  and  differing 
as  much  from  the  laughter  of  a  Chamfort  or  a  Sheridan  as 
the  gastronomic  enjoyment  of  an  ancient  Briton,  whose  dinner 
had  no  other  "removes"  than  from  acorns  to  beech-mast  and 
back  again  to  acorns,  differed  from  the  subtle  pleasures 
of  the  palate  experienced  by  his  turtle-eating  descendant. 
It  was  their  lot  to  live  seriously  through  stages  which  to  later 
generations  were  to  become  comedy,  as  those  amiable-looking 
pre-Adamite  amphibia  which  Professor  Owen  has  restored 
for  us  in  effigy  at  Sydenham  doubtless  took  seriously  the  gro- 
tesque physiognomies  of  their  kindred.    Heavy  experience 
in  their  case,  as  in  every  other,  was  the  base  from  which  the 
salt  of  future  wit  was  to  be  made, 


52 


GERMAN  WIT: 


Humor  is  of  earlier  growth  than  Wit,  and  it  is  in  accord- 
ance with  this  earHer  growth  that  it  has  more  affinity  with 
the  poetic  tendencies,  while  Wit  is  more  nearly  allied  to  the 
ratiocinative  intellect.  Humor  draws  its  materials  from  sit- 
uations and  characteristics;  Wit  seizes  on  unexpected  and 
complex  relations.  Humor  is  chiefly  representative  and 
descriptive;  it  is  diffuse,  and  flows  along  without  any  other 
law  than  its  own  fantastic  will ;  or  it  flits  about  like  a  will-o'- 
the-wisp,  amazing  us  by  its  whimsical  transitions.  Wit  is 
brief  and  sudden,  and  sharply  defined  as  a  crystal;  it  does 
not  make  pictures,  it  is  not  fantastic ;  but  it  detects  an  unsus- 
pected analogy,  or  suggests  a  startling  or  confounding  infer- 
ence. Every  one  who  has  had  the  opportunity  of  making 
the  comparison  will  remember  that  the  effect  produced  on 
him  by  some  witticisms  is  closely  akin  to  the  effect  produced 
on  him  by  subtle  reasoning,  which  lays  open  a  fallacy  or 
absurdity ;  and  there  are  persons  whose  delight  in  such  reason- 
ing always  manifests  itself  in  laughter.  This  affinity  of  Wit 
with  ratiocination  is  the  more  obvious  in  proportion  as  the 
species  of  wit  is  higher  and  deals  less  with  words  and  with 
superficialities  than  with  the  essential  qualities  of  things. 
Some  of  Johnson's  most  admirable  witticisms  consist  in  the 
suggestion  of  an  analogy  which  immediately  exposes  the 
absurdity  of  an  action  or  proposition;  and  it  is  only  their 
ingenuity,  condensation,  and  instantaneousness  which  hft 
them  from  reasoning  into  Wit — they  are  reasoning  raised  to 
a  higher  power.  On  the  other  hand.  Humor,  in  its  higher 
forms,'  and  in  proportion  as  it  associates  itself  with  the  sym- 
pathetic emotions,  continually  passes  into  poetry:  nearly  all 
great  modern  humorists  may  be  called  prose  poets. 

Some  confusion  as  to  the  nature  of  humor  has  been  created 
by  the  fact  that  those  who  have  written  most  eloquently  on 
it  have  dwelt  almost  exclusively  on  its  higher  forms,  and 
have  defined  humor  in  general  as  the  sympathetic  presenta- 
tion of  incongruous  elements  in  human  nature  and  life — a 
definition  which  only  applies  to  its  later  development.  A 
great  deal  of  humor  may  coexist  with  a  geat  deal  of  barbar- 
ism, as  we  see  in  the  middle  ages ;  but  the  strongest  flavor 
of  the  humor  in  such  cases  will  come,  not  from  sympathy, 
but  more  probably  from  triumphant  egoism  or  intolerance; 
at  best  it  will  be  the  love  of  the  ludicrous  exhibiting  itself  in 
illustrations  of  successful  cunning  and  of  the  lex  talionis,  as 


HEINRTCM  HEtNK 


53 


in  "  Reineke  Fuchs,"  or  shaking  off  in  a  holiday  mood  the 
yoke  of  a  too  exacting  faith,  as  in  the  old  Mysteries.  Again, 
it  is  impossible  to  deny  a  high  degree  of  humor  to  many 
practical  jokes,  but  no  sympathetic  nature  can  enjoy  them. 
Strange  as  the  genealogy  may  seem,  the  original  parentage 
of  that  wonderful  and  delicious  mixture  of  fun,  fancy,  phil- 
osophy, and  feeling  which  constitutes  modern  humor  was 
probably  the  cruel  mockery  of  a  savage  at  the  writhings  of  a 
suffering  enemy — such  js  the  tendency  of  things  towards 
the  better  and  more  beautiful !  Probably  the  reason  why  high 
culture  demands  more  complete  harmony  with  its  moral 
sympathies  in  humor  than  in  wit  is  that  humor  is  in  its 
nature  more  prolix — that  it  has  not  the  direct  and  irresistible 
force  of  wit  Wit  is  an  electric  shock,  which  takes  us  by 
violence  quite  independently  of  our  predominant  mental  dis- 
position; but  humor  approaches  us  more  deliberately  and 
!laves  us  masters  of  ourselves.  Hence  it  is  that,  while 
coarse  and  cruel  humor  has  almost  disappeared  from  contem- 
porary literature,  coarse  and  cruel  wit  abounds.  Even 
refined  men  cannot  help  laughing  at  a  coarse  bon-mot  or  a 
lacerating  personality,  if  the  ''shock"  of  the  witticism  is  a 
powerful  one;  while  mere  fun  will  have  no  power  over  them 
if  it  jar  on  their  moral  taste:  Hence,  too,  it  is  that,  while 
wit  is  perennial,  humor  is  liable  to  become  superannuated. 

As  is  usual  with  definitions  and  classifications,  however, 
this  distinction  between  wit  and  humor  does  not  exactly 
represent  the  actual  fact.  Like  all  other  species.  Wit  and 
Humor  overlap  and  blend  with  each  other.  There  are  bon- 
mots,  like  many  of  Charles  Lamb's,  which  are  a  sort  of  face- 
tious hybrids,  we  hardly  know  whether  to  call  them  witty  or 
humorous;  there  are  rather  lengthy  descriptions  or  narratives 
which,  like  Voltaire's  "  Micromegas,"  would  be  humorous 
if  they  were  not  so  sparkling  and  antithetic,  so  pregnant 
with  suggestion  and  satire  that  we  are  obliged  to  call  them 
witty.  We  rarely  find  wit  untempered  by  humor,  or  humor 
without  a  spice  of  wit;  and  sometimes  we  find  them  both 
united  in  the  highest  degree  in  the  same  mind,  as  in  Shake- 
speare and  Moliere.  A  happy  conjunction  this,  for  wit  is 
apt  to  be  cold,  and  thin-lipped,  and  Mephistophelean  in 
men  who  have  no  relish  for  humor,  whose  lungs  do  never 
crow  like  Chanticleer  at  fun  and  drollery ;  and  broad-faced 
rollicking  humor  needs  the  refining  influence  of  wit.    IikIlx  d, 


54 


GERMAN  WIT: 


it  may  be  said  that  there  is  no  really  fine  writing  in  whie, 
wit  has  not  implicit,  if  not  an  explicit,  action.  The  wit  mav 
never  rise  to  the  surface,  it  may  never  flame  out  into  a 
witticism;  but  it  helps  to  give  brightness  and  transparency, 
it  warns  off  from  flights  and  exaggerations  which  verge  on 
the  ridiculous — -in  every  genre  of  writing  it  preserves  a  man 
from  sinking  into  the  genre  ennuyeux.  And  it  is  eminently 
needed  for  this  office  in  humorous  writing;  for,  as  humor 
has  no  limits  imposed  on  it  by  its  material,  no  law  but  its 
own  exuberance,  it  is  apt  to  become  preposterous  and  weari- 
some unless  checked  by  wit,  which  is  the  enemy  of  all 
monotony,  of  all  lengthiness,  of  all  exaggeration. 

Perhaps  the  nearest  approach  Nature  has  given  us  to  a  com- 
plete analysis,  in  which  wit  is  as  thoroughly  exhausted  of 
humor  as  possible,  and  humor  as  bare  as  possible  of  wit,  is  in 
the  typical  Frenchman  and  the  typical  German.  Voltaire, 
the  intensest  example  of  pure  wit,  fails  in  most  of  his  fictions 
from  his  lack  of  humor.  *' Micromegas"  is  a  perfect  tal^, 
because,  as  it  deals  chiefly  with  philosophic  ideas  and  does 
not  touch  the  marrow  of  human  feeling  and  life,  the  writer's 
wit  and  wisdom  were  all-sufficient  for  his  purpose.  Not  so 
with  Candide."  Here  Voltaire  had  to  give  pictures  of  life  as 
well  as  to  convey  philosophic  truth  and  satire,  and  here  we 
feel  the  want  of  humor.  The  sense  of  the  ludicrous  is  continu- 
ally defeated  by  disgust,  and  the  scenes,  instead  of  present- 
ing us  with  an  amusing  or  agreeable  picture,  are  only  the 
frame  for  a  witticism.  On  the  other  hand,  German  humor 
generally  shows  no  sense  of  measure,  no  instinctive  tact;  it 
is  either  floundering  and  clumsy  as  the  antics  of  a  leviathan, 
or  laborious  and  interminable  as  a  Lapland  day,  in  which  one 
loses  all  hope  that  the  stars  and  quiet  will  ever  come.  For 
this  reason  Jean  Paul,  the  greatest  of  German  humorists,  is 
unendurable  to  many  readers,  and  frequently  tiresome  to  all. 
Here,  as  elsewhere,  the  Germans  show  the  absence  of  that 
delicate  perception,  that  sensibility  to  gradation,  which  is  the 
essence  of  tact  and  taste,  and  the  necessary  concomitant  of 
wit.  All  his  subtility  is  reserved  for  the  region  of  metaphys- 
ics. For  Identitdty  in  the  abstract,  no  one  can  have  an  acuter 
vision ;  but  in  the  concrete  he  is  satisfied  with  a  very  loose 
approximation.  He  has  the  finest  nose  for  Empirismus  sT 
philosophical  doctrine,  but  the  presence  of  more  or  let 
tobacco-smoke  in  the  air  he  breathes  is  imperceptibly  to  him 


HEINRICH  HEINE. 


55 


To  the  typical  German — Vettcr  Michel — it  is  indifferent 
whether  his  door-lock  will  catch  ;  whether  his  teacup  be  more 
or  less  than  an  inch  thick ;  whether  or  not  his  book  have  ever}' 
other  leaf  unstitched ;  whether  his  neighbor's  conversation  be 
more  or  less  of  a  shout;  whether  he  pronounce  b  ox  p,  t  or  d\ 
whether  or  not  his  adored  one's  teeth  be  few  and  far  between. 
He  has  the  same  sort  of  insensibility  to  gradations  in  time. 
A  German  comedy  is  like  a  German  sentence :  you  see  no 
reason  in  its  structure  why  it  should  ever  come  to  cfn  end, 
and  you  accept  the  conclusion  as  an  arrangement  of  Provi- 
dence rather  than  of  the  author.  We  have  heard  Germans 
use  the  word  Langcweile^  the  equivalent  for  ennui,  and  we 
have  secretly  wondered  what  it  can  be  that  produces  ennui 
in  a  German.  Not  the  longest  tragedies,  for  we  have  known 
him  to  pronounce  that  hdchstfesselnd\  not  the  heaviest  of 
heavy  books,  for  he  delights  in  that  as  grundlich  ;  not  the 
slowest  of  journeys  in  a  Postwagen,  for  the  slower  the  horses 
the  more  cigars  he  can  smoke  before  he  reaches  his  journey's 
end.  German  ennui  must  be  something  as  superlative  as 
Barclay's  treble  X,  which,  we  suppose,  implies  an  extremely 
unknown  quantity  of  stupefaction. 

It  is  easy  to  see  that  this  national  deficiency  in  nicety  of 
perception  must  have  its  effect  on  the  national  appreciation 
and  exhibition  of  Humor.  You  find  in  Germany  ardent 
admirers  of  Shakespeare,  who  tell  you  that  what  they  think 
most  admirable  in  him  is  his  Wortspiel^  his  verbal  quibbles; 
and  it  is  a  remarkable  fact  that,  among  the  five  great  races 
concerned  in  modern  civilization,  the  German  race  is  the  only 
one  which,  up  to  the  present  century,  had  contributed  noth- 
ing classic  to  the  common  stock  of  European  wit  and  humor; 
unless  ''Reineke  Fuchs"  can  be  fairly  claimed  as  a  peculiarly 
Teutonic  product.  Ital}'^  was  the  birth-place  of  Pantomime 
and  the  immortal  Pulcinello ;  Spain  had  produced  Cervantes  ; 
France  had  produced  Rabelais  and  Moliere,  and  classic  wits 
innumerable ;  England  had  yielded  Shakespeare  and  a  host  of 
humorists.  But  Germany  had  borne  no  great  comic  drama- 
tist, no  great  satirist,  and  she  has  not  yet  repaired  the  omis- 
sion; she  had  not  even  produced  any  humorist  of  a  high 
order.  Among  her  great  writers,  Lessing  is  the  one  who  is 
the  most  specifically  witty.  We  feel  the  implicit  influence 
of  wit — the  flavor  of  mind" — throughout  his  writings;  and 
it  is  often  concentrated  into  pungent  satire,  as  every  reader 


5^ 


GERMAN  IV/T. 


of  the  "  Hamburgische  Dramaturgie "  remembers.  Still 
Lessing's  name  has  not  become  European  through  his  wit, 
and  his  charming  comedy,  "Minna  von  Barnheim,"  has  won 
no  place  on  a  foreign  stage.  Of  course,  we  dp  not  pr  :tend 
to  an  exhaustive  acquaintance  with  German  literature;  we 
not  only  admit — we  are  sui:e — that  it  includes  much  comic 
writing  of  which  we  know  nothing.  We  simply  state  the 
fact,  that  no  German  production  of  that  kind,  before  the 
present  century,  ranked  as  European- — a  fact  which  does 
not,  indeed,  determine  the  amount  of  the  national  facetious- 
ness,  but  which  is  quite  decisive  as  to  its  quality.  Whatever 
may  be  the  stock  of  fun  which  Germany  yields  for  home 
consumption,  she  has  provided  little  for  the  palate  of  other 
lands.  All  honor  to  her  for  the  still  greater  things  she  has 
done  for  us!  She  has  fought  the  hardest  fight  for  freedom 
of  thought,  has  produced  the  grandest  inventions,  has  made 
magnificent  contributions  to  science,  has  given  us  some  of 
the  divinest  poetry,  and  quite  the  divinest  music,  in  the 
world.  We  revere  and  treasure  the  products  of  the  German 
mind.  To  say  that  that  mind  is  not  fertile  in  wit,  is  only 
like  saying  that  excellent  wheat-land  is  not  rich  pasture;  to 
say  that  we  do  not  enjoy  German  facetiousness,  is  no  more 
than  to  say  that  though  the  horse  is  the  finest  of  quadrupeds 
we  do  not  like  him  to  lay  his  hoof  playfully  on  our  shoulder. 
Still,  as  we  have  noticed  that  the  pointless  puns  and  stupid  jocu- 
larity of  the  boy  may  ultimately  be  developed  into  the 
epigrammatic  brilliancy  and  polished  playfulness  of  the  man  ; 
as  we  believe  that  racy  wit  and  chastened  delicate  humor 
are  inevitably  the  results  of  invigorated  and  refined  mental 
activity,  we  can  also  believe  that  Germany  will  one  day  yield 
a  crop  of  wits  and  humorists. 

Perhaps  there  is  already  an  earnest  of  that  future  crop  in 
the  existence  of  Heinrich  Heine,  a  German  born  with  the  pre- 
sent century,  who,  to  Teutonic  imagination,  sensibility,  and 
humor,  adds  an  amount  of  esprit  that  would  make  him  brill- 
iant among  the  most  brilliant  of  Frenchmen.  True,  this 
unique  German  wit  is  half  a  Hebrew;  but  he  and  his  ances- 
tors spent  their  youth  in  German  air,  and  were  reared  on 
Wurst  and  Saurkraut,  so  that  he  is  as  much  a  German  as  a 
pheasant  is  an  English  bird,  or  a  potato  an  Irish  vegetable. 
But  whatever  else  he  may  be,  Heine  is  one  of  the  most 
remarkable  men  of  this  age ;  no  echo,  but  a  real  voice,  and 


HEINRJCH  nJiJNK. 


37 


therefore,  like  all  genuine  things  in  this  world,  worth  study- 
ing ;  a  surpassing  lyric  poet,  who  has  uttered  our  feelings 
for  us  in  delicious  song ;  a  iiumorist,  who  touches  leaden  folly 
with  the  magic  wand  of  his  fancy,  and  transmutes  it  into  the 
fine  gold  of  art — who  sheds  his  sunny  smile  on  human  tears, 
and  makes  them  a  beauteous  rainbow  on  the  cloudy  back- 
ground of  life  ;  a  wit,  who  holds  in  his  mighty  hand  the  most 
scorching  lightnings  of  satire  ;  an  artist  in  prose  literature, 
who  has  shown  even  more  completely  than  Goethe  the  pos- 
sibilities of  German  prose  ;  and — in  spite  of  all  charges 
against  him,  true  as  well  as  false — a  lover  of  freedom,  who 
has  spoken  wise  and  brave  words  on  behalf  of  his  fellow-men. 
He  is,  moreover,  a  suffering  man,  who,  with  all  the  highly 
wrought  sensibiliity  of  genius,  has  to  endure  terrible  physical 
ills  ;  and  as  such  he  calls  forth  more  than  an  intellectual  inter- 
est.  It  is  true,  alas  !  that  there  is  a  heavy  weight  in  the  other 
scale — that  Heine's  magnificent  powers  have  often  served 
only  to  give  electric  force  to  the  expression  of  debased  feel- 
ing, so  that  his  works  are  no  Phidian  statue  of  gold,  and 
ivory,  and  gems,  but  have  not  a  little  tffass,  and  iron,  and 
miry  clay  mingled  with  the  precious  metal,  The  audacity  of 
his  occasional  coarseness  and  personality  is  unparalleled  in 
contemporary  literature,  and  has  hardly  been  exceeded  by  the 
license  of  former  days.  Hence,  before  his  volumes  are  put 
within  the  reach  of  immature  minds,  there  is  need  of  a  friendly 
penknife  to  exercise  a  strict  censorship.  Yet,  when  all  coarse- 
ness, all  scurrility,  all  Mephistophelean  contempt  for  the 
reverent  feelings  of  other  men  is  removed,  there  will  be  a 
plenteous  remainder  of  exquisite  poetry,  of  wit,  humor,  and 
just  thought.  It  is  apparently  too  often  a  congenial  task  to 
write  severe  words  about  the  transgressions  committed  by 
men  of  genius,  especially  when  the  censor  has  the  advantage 
of  being  himself  a  man  of  no  genius,  so  that  those  transgres- 
sions seem  to  him  quite  gratuitous  ;  he,  forsooth,  never  lacer- 
ated any  one  by  his  wit,  or  gave  irresistible  piquancy  to  a 
coarse  allusion,  and  his  indignation  is  not  mitigated  by  any 
knowledge  of  the  temptation  that  lies  in  transcendent  power. 
We  are  also  apt  to  measure  what  a  gifted  man  has  done  by 
our  arbitrary  conc^tion  of  what  he  might  have  done,  rather 
than  by  a  comparison  of  his  actual  doings  with  our  own  or 
those  of  other  ordinary  men.  We  make  ourselves  over-zeal- 
ous agents  of  Heaven,  and  demand  that  our  brother  should 


58 


GERMAN  WIT: 


bring  usurious  interest  for  his  five  talents,  forgetting  that  it 
is  less  easy  to  manage  five  talents  than  two.  Whatever  ben- 
efit there  may  be  in  denouncing  the  evil,  it  is  after  all  more 
edifying,  and  certainly  more  cheering,  to  appreciate  the  good. 
Hence,  in  endeavoring  to  give  our  readers  some  account  of 
Heine  and  his  works,  we  shall  not  dwell  lengthily  on  his  fail- 
ings ;  we  shall  not  hold  the  candle  up  to  dusty,  vermin- 
haunted  corners,  but  let  the  light  fall  as  much  as  possible  on 
the  nobler  and  more  attractive  details.  Our  sketch  of  Heine's  * 
life,  which  has  been  drawn  from  various  sources,  will  be  free 
from  everything  like  intrusive  gossip,  and  will  derive  its  col- 
oring chiefly  from  the  autobiographical  hints  and  descrip- 
tions scattered  through  his  own  writings.  Those  of  our 
readers  who  happen  to  know  nothing  of  Heine  will  in  this 
way  be  making  their  acquaintance  with  the  writer  while  they 
are  learning  the  outline  of  his  career. 

We  have  said  that  Heine  was  born  with  the  present  cen- 
tury ;  but  this  statement  is  not  precise,  for  we  learn  that, 
according  to  his  certificate  of  baptism,  he  was  born  Decem- 
ber 12,  1799.  However,  as  he  himself  says,  the  important 
point  is,  that  he  was  born,  and  born  on  the  banks  of  the  Rhine, 
at  Dusseldorf,  where  his  father  was  a  merchant.  In  his 
Reisebilder"  he  gives  us  some  recollections,  in  his  wild 
poetic  way,  of  the  dear  old  town  where  he  spent  his  child- 
hood, and  of  his  school-boy  troubles  there.  We  shall  quote 
from  these  in  butterfly  fashion,  sipping  a  little  nectar  here 
and  there,  without  regard  to  any  strict  order: 

"I  first  saw  the  light  on  the  banks  of  that  lovely  stream,  where 
Folly  grows  on  the  green  hills,  and  in  autumn  is  plucked,  pressed, 
poured  into  casks,  and  sent  into  foreign  lands.  Believe  me,  I  yester- 
day heard  some  one  utter  folly  Avhich,  in  anno  181 1,  lay  in  a  bunch  of 
grapes  I  then  saw  growing  on  the  Johannisberg.  .  .  .  Mon  Dieu !  if 
1  had  only  such  faith  in  me  that  I  could  remove  mountains,  the  Johan- 
nisberg would  be  the  very  mountain  I  should  send  for  wherever  I 
might  be  ;  but  as  my  faith  is  not  so  strong,  imagination  must  help  me, 
and  it  transports  me  at  once  to  the  lovely  Rhine.  ...  I  am  again  a 
child,  and  playing  with  other  children  on  the  Schlossplatz,  at  Diissel- 
dorf  on  the  Rhine.  Yes,  madam,  there  was  I  born ;  and  I  note  this 
expressly,  in  case,  after  my  death,  seven  cities — Schilda,  Krahwinkel, 
Polkwitz,  Bockum,  Diilkm,  Gottingen,  and  Schoppenstadt — should 
contend  for  the  honor  of  being  my  birthplace.  Dusseldorf  is  a  town 
on  the  Rhine  ;  sixteen  thousand  men  live  there,  and  many  hundred 
thousand  men  besides  lie  buried  there.  .  .  .  Among  them,  many  ot 
whom  my  mother  says  that  it  would  be  better  if  they  were  still  living  ; 
for  example,  my  grandfather  and  my  uncle,  the  old  Herr  Von  Geldern 


HEINRICH  HEINE. 


59 


and  the  young  Herr  Von  Geldern,  both  such  celebrated  doctors,  who 
saved  so  many  men  from  death,  and  yet  must  die  themselves,  And 
the  pious  Ursula,  who  carried  me  in  her  arms  when  I  was  a  child, 
also  hes  buried  there,  and  a  rose-bush  grows  on  her  grave  ;  she  loved 
the  scent  of  roses  so  well  in  life,  and  her  heart  was  pure  rose-incense 
and  goodness.  The  knowing  old  Canon,  too,  hes  buried  there. 
Heavens,  what  an  object  he  looked  when  I  last  saw  him  !  He  was 
made  up  of  nothiug  but  mind  and  plasters,  and  nevertheless  studied 
day  and  night,  as  if  he  were  alarmed  lest  the  M^orms  should  find  an 
idea  too  little  in  his  head!  And  the  little  William  lies  there,  and  for 
this  1  am  to  blame.  We  were  schoolfellows  in  the  Franciscan 
monastery,  and  were  playing  on  that  side  of  it  where  the  Diissel  flows 
between  stones  walls,  and  I  said,  "  William,  fetch  out  the  kitten  that 
has  just  fallen  in,"  and  merrily  he  went  down  on  to  the  plank  which 
lay  across  the  brook,  and  snatched  the  kitten  out  of  the  water,  but 
fell  in  himself,  and  was  dragged  out  dripping  and  dead.  The  kitten 
lived  to  a  good  old  age.  .  .  .  Princes  in  that  day  were  not  the  tor- 
mented race  they  are  now;  the  crown  grew  firmly  on  tfteir  heads,  and 
at  night  they  drew  a  nightcap  over  it,  and  slept  peacefully,  and 
peacefully  slept  the  people  at  their  feet ;  and  when  the  people  waked 
in  the  morning,  they  said  "  Good-morning,  father!  " — and  the  princes 
answered,  "Good-morning,  dear  children!"  But  it  was  suddenly 
quite  otherwise  ;  for  when  we  awoke  one  morning  at  Diisseldorf,  and 
were  ready  to  say,  "Good-morning,  father!  " — lo  !  the  father  was  gone 
away  ;  and  in  the  whole  town  there  was  nothing  but  dumb  sorrow, 
everywhere  a  sort  of  funeral  disposition  ;  and  people  glided  along 
silently  to  the  market,  and  read  the  long  placard  placed  on  the  door 
of  the  Town  Hall.  It  was  dismal  weather ;  yet  the  lean  tailor,  Kilian, 
stood  in  his  nankeen  jacket  which  he  usually  wore  only  in  the  house, 
and  his  blue  worsted  stockings  hung  down  so  that  his  naked  legs 
peeped  out  mournfully,  and  his  thin  lips  trem.bled  while  he  muttered 
the  announcement  to  himself.  And  an  old  soldier  read  rather  louder, 
and  at  many  a  word  a  crystal  tear  trickled  down  to  his  brave  old  mous- 
tache. I  stood  near  him  and  wept  in  company,  and  asked  him, 
''Why  we  weptf  He  answerd,  "The  Elector  has  abdicated." 
And  then  he  read  again,  and  at  the  words,  "for  the  long  manifested 
fidehty  of  my  subjects,"  and  '.'hereby  setyou  free  from  your  allegiance," 
he  wept  more  than  ever.  It  is  strangly  touching  to  see  an  old  man 
like  that,  with  faded  uniform  and  scarred  face,  weep  so  bitterly  all  of 
a  sudden.  While  we  were  reading,  the  Electoral  arms  weic  taken 
down  from  the  Town  Hall ;  everything  had  such  a  desolate  ;iir  that  it 
was  as  if  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  were  expected.  ...  I  went  home  and 
wept,  and  wailed  out,  "  The  Elector  has  abdicated!  "  In  vain  my 
mother  took  a  world  of  trouble  to  explain  the  thing  to  me.  I  knew 
what  I  knew  ;  I  was  not  to  be  persuaded,  but  went  crying  to  bed,  and 
in  the  night  dreamed  that  the  world  was  at  an  end." 

The  next  morning,  however,  the  sun  rises  as  usual,  and 
Joachim  Murat  is  proclaimed  Grand  Duke,  whereupon  there 
is  a  holiday  at  the  public  school,  and  Heinrich  (or  Harry, 
for  that  was  his  baptismal  name,  which  he  afterwards  had 


6o 


GERMAN  WIT: 


the  good  taste  to  change),  perched  on  the  bronze  horse  of 
the  Electoral  statue,  sees  quite  a  different  scene  from  yester- 
day's : 

"The  next  day  the  world  was  again  all  in  order,  and  we  had  school 
as  before,  and  things  were  got  by  heart  as  before — the  Roman  emper- 
ors, chronology,  the  nouns  in  im  the  verba  irregularia,  Greek, 
Hebrew,  geography,  mental  arithmetic ! — heavens !  my  head  is  still 
dizzy  with  it,  all  must  be  learned  by  heart !  And  a  great  deal  of  this  came 
vin  very  conveniently  for  me  in  after-life.  For  if  I  had  not  known  the 
Roman  kings  by  heart,  it  would  subsequently  have  been  quite  indiffer- 
ent to  me  whether  Niebuhr  had  proved  or  had  not  proved  that  they  never 
really  existed.  .  .  But  oh  !  the  trouble  I  had  at  school  with  the  endless 
dates.  And  with  arithmetic  it  was  still  worse.  What  I  understood 
best  was  subtraction,  for  that  was  a  very  practical  rule  :  "  Four  can't 
be  taken  from  three,  therefore  I  must  borrow  one."  But  I  advise 
every  one  in  sitch  a  case  to  borrow  a  few  extra  pence,  for  no  one  can 
tell  what  may  happen.  ...  As  for  Latin,  you  have  no  idea,  madam, 
what  a  complicated  affair  it  is.  The  Romans  would  never  have  found 
time  to  conquer  the  world  if  they  had  first  had  to  learn  Latin.  Luckily 
for  them,  they  already  knew  in  their  cradles  what  nouns  have  their 
accusative  in  im.  I,  on  the  contrary,  had  to  learn  them  by  heart  in 
the  sweat  of  my  brow  ;  nevertheless,  it  is  fortunate  for  me  that  I  know 
them  ;  .  .  .  and  the  fact  that  I  have  them  at  my  finger-ends  if  I  should 
ever  happen  to  want  them  suddenly,  affords  me  much  inward  repose 
and  consolation  in  many  troubled  hours  of  life.  ...  Of  Greek  I  will 
not  say  a  word  ;  I  should  get  too  much  irritated.  The  monks  in  the 
middle  ages  were  not  so  far  wrong  when  they  maintained  that  Greek 
was  an  invention  of  the  devil.  God  knows  the  suffering  I  endured 
over  it.  .  .  .  With  Hebrew  it  went  somewhat  better,  for  I  had  always 
a  great  liking  for  the  Jews,  though  to  this  very  hour  they  crucify  my 
good  name  ;  but  I  could  never  get  on  so  far  in  Hebrew  as  my  watch, 
which  had  much  famihar  intercourse  with  pawnbrokers,  and  in  this  ' 
way  contracted  many  Jewish  habits — for  example,  it  wouldn't  go  on 
Saturdays." 

Heine's  parents  were  apparently  not  wealthy,  but  his 
education  was  cared  for  by  his  uncle,  Solomon  Heine,  a  great 
banker  in  Hamburg,  so  that  he  had  no  early  pecuniary  dis- 
advantages to  struggle  with.  He  seems  to  have  been  very 
happy  in  his  mother,  who  was  not  of  Hebrew,  but  of  Teutonic 
blood ;  he  often  mentions  her  with  reverence  and  affection, 
and  in  the  '<Buch  der  Lieder"  there  are  two  exquisite  son- 
nets addressed  to  her;  which  tell  how  his  proud  spirit  was 
always  subdued  by  the  charm  of  her  presence,  and  how  her 
love  was  the  home  of  his  heart  after  restless,  weary  wander- 
ing: . 


HEINRiCH  HE/NE. 


61 


"  Wie  ina(  btig  auch  mein  stolzer  Muth  sich  blahe, 
In  deiner  sclig  siissen,  trauten  Nahc 
P>greift  mich  oft  ein  demuthvolle  Zagen. 

-X-  *  *  *  * 

Und  immer  irrte  ich  nach  Leibe,  immer 
Nach  Leibe,  doch  die  Leibe  fand  ich  nimmer, 
Und  kehrte  um  nach  Hause,  krank  und  triipe. 
Doch  da  bist  du  entgegen  mir  gekommen, 
Und  ach !  was  da  in  deinem  Aug'  geschwommen, 
Das  war  die  siisse,  langgesuchte  Liebe." 

He  was  at  first  destined  for  a  mercantile  life,  but  Nature 
declared  too  strongly  against  this  plan.  "God  knows,"  he 
has  lately  said  in  conversation  with  his  brother,  I  would  will- 
ingly have  become  a  banker,  but  I  could  never  bring  myself 
to  that  pass.  I  very  early  discerned  that  bankers  would  one 
day  be  the  rulers  of  the  world."  So  commerce  was  at  length 
given  up  for  law,  the  study  of  which  he  began  in  1819  at  the 
University  of  Bonn.  He  had  already  published  some  poems 
in  the  corner  of  a  newspaper,  and  among  them  was  one  on 
Napoleon,  the  object  of  his  youthful  enthusiasm.  This  poem, 
he  says  in  a  letter  to  St.  Rene  Taillandier,  was  written  when 
he  was  only  sixteen.  It  is  still  to  be  found  in  the  ''Buch  der 
Lieder"  under  the  title  "Die  Grenadiere,"  and  it  proves  that 
even  in  its  earliest  efforts  his  genius  showed  a  strongly  specific 
character.  It  will  be  easily  imagined  that  the  germs  of  poetry 
sprouted  too  vigorously  in  Heine's  brain  for  jurisprudence  to 
find  much  room  there.  Lectures  on  history  and  literature, 
we  are  told,  were  more  diligently  attended  than  lectures  on 
law.  He  had  taken  care,  too,  to  furnish  his  trunk  with  abun- 
dant editions  of  the  poets,  and  the  poet  he  especially  studied 
at  that  time  was  Byron.  At  a  later  period  we  find  his  taste 
taking  another  direction,  for  he  writes  :  "  Of  all  authors,  Byron 
is  precisely  the  one  who  excites  in  me  the  most  intolerable 
emotion  ;  whereas  Scott,  in  every  one  of  his  works,  gladdens 
my  heart,  soothes  and  invigorates  me."  Another  indication 
of  his  bent  in  these  Bonn  days  was  a  newspaper  essay,  in 
which  he  attacked  the  Romantic  school ;  and  here  also  he 
went  through  that  chicken-pox  of  authorship-the  Production 
of  a  tragedy.  Heine's  tragedy — "  Almansor" — is,  as  might 
be  expected,  better  than  the  majority  of  these  youthful  mis- 
takes.   The  tragic  collision  lies  in  the  conflict  between  natu- 


62 


GERMAN  WIT: 


ral  affection  and  the  deadly  hatred  of  religion  and  of  race — 
in  the  sacrifice  of  youthful  lovers  to  the  strife  between  Moor 
and  Spaniard,  Moslem  and  Christian.  Some  of  the  situations 
are  striking,  and  there  are  passages  of  considerable  poetic 
merit;  but  the  characters  are  little  more  than  shadowy  vehic- 
les for  the  poetry,  and  there  is  a  want  of  clearness  and  prob- 
ability in  the  structure.  It  was  published  two  years  later,  in 
company  with  another  tragedy,  in  one  act,  called  William 
Ratcliffe,"  in  which  there  is  rather  a  feeble  use  of  the  Scotch 
second-sight  after  the  manner  of  the  Fate  in  the  Greek  trag- 
edy. We  smile  to  find  Heine  saj  ing  of  his  tragedies,  in  a 
letter  to  a  friend  soon  after  their  publication :  "I  know  they 
will  be  terribly  cut  up,  but  I  will  confess  to  you  in  confidence 
that  they  are  very  good — better  than  my  collection  of  poems, 
which  are  not  worth  a  shot."  Elsewhere  he  tells  us,  that 
when,  after  one  of  Paganini's  concerts,  he  was  passionately 
complimenting  the  great  master  on  his  violin-playing,  Pagan- 
ini  interrupted  him  thus  :  "But  how  were  you  pleased  with 
my  bowsf^' 

In  1 820,  Heine  left  Bonn  for  Gottingen.  He  there  pursued 
his  omission  of  law  studies;  and  at  the  end  of  three  months 
he  was  rusticated  for  a  breach  of  the  laws  against  duelling. 
While  there,  he  had  attempted  a  negotiation  with  Brockhaus 
for  the  printing  of  a  volume  of  poems,  and  had  endured  that 
first  ordeal  of  lovers  and  poets — a  refusal.  It  was  not  until 
a  year  after  that  he  found  a  Berlin  publisher  for  his  first  vol- 
ume of  poems,  subsequently  transformed,  with  additions,  into 
the  "  Buch  der  Lieder."  He  remanied  between  two  and  three 
years  at  Berlin,  and  the  society  he  found  there  seems  to  have 
made  these  years  an  important  epoch  in  his  culture.  He 
was  one  of  the  youngest  members  of  a  circle  which  assem- 
bled at  the  house  of  the  poetess  Elisa  von  Hohenhausen,  the 
translator  of  Byron— a  circle  which  included  Chamisso,  Varn- 
hagen,  and  Rachel  (Varnhagen's  wife).  For  Rachel,  Heine 
had  a  profound  a(imiration  and  regard.  He  afterwards  dedi- 
cated to  her  the  poems  included  under  the  title  "  Heimkehr ;" 
and  he  frequentlv  refers  to  her  or  quotes  her  in  a  way  that 
indicates  how  he  valued  her  influence.  According  to  his 
friend,  F.  Von  Hohenhausen,  the  opinions  concerning  Heine's 
talent  were  very  various  among  his  Berlin  friends,  and  it  was 
only  a  small  minority  that  had  any  presentiment  of  his  future 
fame.    In  this  minority  was  Elise  Von  Hohenhausen,  who 


FiETNnrCH  HKrNE. 


'63 


proclaimed  Heine  as  the  Byron  of  Germany;  but  her  opinion 
was  met  with  much  head-shaking  and  opposition.  We  can 
imagine  how  precious  was  such  a  recognition  as  hers  to  the 
young  poet,  then  only  two  or  three  ind  twenty,  and  with  by 
no  means  an  impressive  personality  for  superficial  eyes. 
Perhaps  even  the  deep-sighted  were  far  from  detecting  in  that 
small,  blond,  pale  young  man,  with  quiet,  gentle  manners, 
the  latent  powers  of  ridicule  and  sarcasm — the  terrible  talons 
that  were  one  day  to  be  thrust  out  from  the  velvet  paw  of 
the  young  leopard. 

It  was  apparently  during  his  residence  in  Berlin  that 
Heine  united  himself  with  th"^  Lutheran  Church.  He  would 
willingly,  like  many  of  his  friends,  he  tells  us,  have  remained 
free  from  all  ecclesiastical  ties  if  the  authorities  there  had 
not  forbidden  residence  in  Prussia  and  especially  in  Berlin,  to 
every  one  who  did  not  belong  to  one  of  the  positive  relig- 
ions recognized  by  the  State  : 

"As  Henry  IV.  once  laughingly  said,  '  Pai'is  vaiit  bien  une  messe,' 
so  I  might  with  reason  say,  'Berlin  vaut  bie??  icne  preche and  I 
could  afterwards,  as  before,  accommodate  myself  to  the  very  enlight- 
ened Christianity,  filtrated  from  all  superstition,  which  could  then  be 
had  in  the  churches  of  Berhn,  and  which  was  even  free  from  the  divinity 
of  Christ,  like  turtle-soup  without  turtle.  " 

At  the  same  period,  too,  Heine  became  acquainted  with 
Hegel.  In  his  lately  published  Gestandnisse  "  (Confess- 
ions), he  throws  on  Hegel's  influence  over  him  the  blue  light 
of  demoniacal  wit,  and  confounds  us  by  the  most  bewildering, 
double-edged  sarcasms;  but  that  influence  seems  to  have 
been  at  least  more  wholesome  than  the  one  which  produced 
the  mocking  retractations  of  the  Gestandnisse."  Through 
his  self-satire,  we  discern  that  in  those  days  he  had  somethiug 
like  real  earnestness  and  enthusiasm,  which  are  certainly  not 
apparent  in  his  present  theistic  confession  of  faith: 

"On  the  whole,  I  never  felt  a  strong  enthusiasm  for  this  philosophy, 
and  conviction  on  the  subject  was  out  of  the  question.  I  never  was 
an  abstract  thinker,  aud  I  accepted  the  synthesis  of  the  Hegelian  doc- 
trine without  demanding  any  proof,  since  its  consequences  flattered 
my  vanity.  1  was  young  and  proud,  and  it  pleased  my  vainglory 
when  I  learned  from  Hegel  that  the  true  God  was  not,  as  w.\  grand- 
mother believed,  the  God  who  lives  in  heaven,  but  myself  here  upon 
earth.  This  foohsh  pride  had  not  in  the  least  a  pernicious  influence 
on  my  feelings ;  on  the  contrary,  it  heightened  these  to  the  pitch  of 


GERMAN  WIT: 


heroism.  T  was  at  that  time  so  lavish  in  generosity  and  self-sacrifice 
that  I  must  assuredly  have  eclipsed  the  most  brilliant  deeds  of  those 
good  bourgeois  of  virtue  who  acted  merely  from  a  sense  of  duty,  and 
simply  obeyed  the  laws  of  morality." 

• 

His  sketch  of  Hegel  is  irresistibly  amusing;  but  we  must 
warn  the  reader  that  Heine's  anecdotes  are  often  mere  devices 
of  style  by  which  he  conveys  his  satire  or  opinions.  The 
reader  will  see  that  he  does  not  neglect  an  opportunity  of 
giving  a  sarcastic  lash  or  two>  in  passing,  to  Meyerbeer,  for 
whose  music  he  has  a  great  contempt.  The  sarcasm  con- 
veyed in  the  substitution  of  reputation  for  music  and  journal- 
ists for  musicians  might  perhaps  escape  any  one  unfamiliar 
with  the  sly  and  unexpected  turns  of  Heine's  ridicule : 

"To  speak  frankly,  I  seldom  understood  him,  and  only  arrived  at 
the  meaning  of  his  words  by  subsequent  reflection.  I  believe  he 
wished  not  to  be  understood  ;  and  hence  his  practice  of  sprinkling  his 
discourse  with  modifying  parentheses ;  hence,  perhaps,  his  preference 
for  persons  of  whom  he  knew  that  they  did  not  understand  him,  and 
to  whom  he  all  the  more  willingly  granted  the  honor  of  his  familiar 
acquaintance.  Thus  every  one  in  Berlin  wondered  at  the  intimate 
companionship  of  the  profound  Hegel  with  the  late  Heinrich  Beer,  a 
brother  of  Giacomo  Meyerbeer,  who  is  universally  known  by  his 
reputation,  and  who  has  been  celebrated  by  the  cleverest  journalists. 
This  Beer,  namely  Heinrich,  was  a  thoroughly  stupid  fellow,  and 
indeed  was  afterwards  actually  declared  imbecile  by  his  family,  and 
placed  under  guardianship,  because  instead  of  making  a  name  for 
himself  in  art  or  in  science  by  means  of  his  great  fortune,  he  squan- 
dered his  money  on  childish  trifles;  and,  for  example,  one  day  bought 
six  thousand  thaler's  M^orth  of  walking-sticks.  This  poor  man,  who 
had  no  wish  to  pass  either  for  a  great  tragic  dramatist,  or  for  a  great 
star-gazer,  or  for  a  laurel  crowned  musical  genius,  a  rival  of  Mozart 
and  Rossini,  and  preferred  giving  his  money  for  walking-sticks — this 
degenerate  Beer  enjoyed  Hegel's  most  confidential  society  ;  he  was 
the  philosopher's  bosom  friend,  his  Py lades,  and  accompanied  him 
everywhere  Hke  his  shadow.  The  equally  witty  and  gifted  Felix 
Mendelssohn  once  sought  to  explain  this  phenomenon  by  maintaining 
that  Hegel  did  not  understand  Heinrich  Beer.  1  now  believe,  how- 
ever, that  the  real  ground  of  that  intimacy  consistf^d  in  tliis — Hegel 
was  convinced  that  no  word  of  what  he  said  was  understood  by  Hein- 
rich Beer  ;  and  he  could  therefore,  in  his  presence,  give  himself  up  to 
all  the  intellectual  out  pourings  of  the  moment.  In  general,  Hegel  s 
conversation  was  a  sort  of  monologue,  sighed  forth  by  starts  in  a 
noiseless  voice  ;  the  odd  roughness  of  his  expressions  often  struck  me, 
and  many  of  them  have  remained  in  my  memory.  One  beaudful 
starlight  evening  we  stood  together  at  the  window,  and  1,  a  young 
man  of  one-and-twenty ,  having  just  had  a  good  dinner  and  finished 
my  coffee,  spoke  with  enthusiasm  of  the  stars,  and  called  them  the 
habitations  of  the  departed.    But  the  master  muttered  to  himself, 


HETNRICH  HEINE.  ,  65 

'The  stars!  hum!  hum  !  The  stars  are  only  a  brilliant  leprosy  on  the 
face  of  the  heavens.*  ^  'For  God's  sake,'  I  cried,  'is  there,  then,  no 
happy  place  above,  where  virtue  is  rewarded  after  death  ? '  Hut  he, 
staring  at  me  with  his  pale  eyes,  said,  cuttingly,  '  So  you  want  a  bonus 
for  having  taken  care  of  your  sick  mother,  and  refrained  from  poison- 
ing your  worthy  brother  ?  '  At  these  words  he  looked  anxiously  round, 
but  appeared  immediately  set  at  rest  when  he  observed  that  it  was 
only  Heinrich  Beer,  who  had  approached  to  invite  him  to  a  game  of 
whist." 

In  1823,  Heine  returned  to  Gottingen  to  complete  his 
career  as  a  law-student,  and  this  time  he  gave  evidence  of 
advanced  mental  maturity,  not  only  by  producing  many  of 
the  charming  poems  subsequently  included  in  the  "  Reise- 
bilder,"  but  also  by  prosecuting  his  professional  studies  dili- 
gently enough  to  leave  Gottingen  in  1825  as  Doctor  juris. 
Hereupon  he  settled  at  Hamburg  as  an  advocate,  but  his 
profession  seems  to  have  been  the  least  pressing  of  his 
occupations.  In  those  days,  a  small,  blond  young  man,  with 
the  brim  of  his  hat  drawn  over  his  nose,  his  coat  flying  open, 
and  his  hands  stuck  in  his  trouser-pockets,  might  be  seen 
stumbling  along  the  streets  of  Hamburg,  staring  from  side 
to  side,  and  appearing  to  have  small  regard  to  the  figure  he 
made  in  the  eyes  of  the  good  citizens.  Occasionally  an 
inhabitant,  more  literary  than  usual,  would  point  out  this 
young  man  to  his  companion  as  Heinrich  Heine ;  but  in 
general  the  young  poet  had  not  to  endure  the  inconveniences 
of  being  a  lion.  His  poems  were  devoured,  but  he  was  not 
asked  to  devour  flattery  in  return.  Whether  because  the 
fair  Hamburgers  acted  in  the  spirit  of  Johnson's  advice  to 
Hannah  More — to  "consider  what  her  flattery  was  worth 
before  she  choked  him  with  it" — or  for  some  other  reason, 
Heine,  according  to  the  testimony  of  August  Lewald,  to 
whom  we  owe  these  particulars  of  his  Hamburg  life,  was  left 
free  from  the  persecution  of  teaparties.  Not  however,  from 
another  persecution  of  genius,  nervous  headaches  which  some 
persons,  we  are  told,  regarded  as  an  improbable  fiction,  \ 
intended  as  a  pretext  for  raising  a  delicate  white  hand  to  his 
forehead.  It  is  probable  that  the  sceptical  persons  alluded 
to  were  themselves  untroubled  with  nervous  headache,  and 
that  their  hands  were  not  delicate.  Slight  details  these,  but 
worth  telling  about  a  man  of  genius,  because  they  help  us  to 
keep  in  mind  that  he  is,  after  all,  our  brother,  having  to  endure 
the  petty  every-day  ills  of  life  as  we  have ;  with  this  differ- 


66 


GERMAN  WIT: 


ence,  that  his  heightened  sensibility  converts  what  are  mere 
insect-stings  for  us  into  scorpion-stings  for  him. 

It  was,  perhaps,  in  these  Hamburg  days  that  Heine  paid 
the  visit  to  Goethe,  of  which  he  gives  us  this  charming  Httle 
picture : 

"  When  I  visited  him  in  Weimar,  and  stood  before  him,  I  involun- 
tarily glanced  at  his  side  to  see  whether  the  eagle  was  not  there  with 
the  lightning  in  his  beak.  I  was  nearly  speaking  Greek  to  him  ;  but, 
as  I  observed  that  he  understood  German,  I  stated  to  him,  in  German, 
that  the  plums  on  the  road  between  Jena  and  Weimar  were  very  good. 
I  had  for  so  many  long  winter  nights  thought  over  what  lofty  and 
profound  things  I  would  say  to  Goethe,  if  ever  I  saw  him.  And  when 
I  saw  him  at  last,  I  said  to  him  that  the  Saxon  plums  were  very  good ! 
And  Goethe  smiled." 

During  the  next  few  years  Heine  produced  the  most  popu- 
lar of  all  his  works —  those  which  have  won  him  his  place 
as  the  greatest  of  living  German  poets  and  humorists. 
Between  1826  and  1829  appeared  the  four  volumes  of  the 
•*  Reisebilder"  (Pictures  of  Travel),  andthe^Buch  derLieder" 
(Book  of  Songs) — a  volume  of  lyrics,  of  which  it  is  hard  to 
say  whether  their  greatest  charm  is  the  lightness  and  finish 
of  their  style,  their  vivid  and  original  imaginativeness,  or 
their  simple,  pure  sensibility.  In  his  '^Reisebilder,"  Heine 
carries  us  with  him  to  the  Karz,  to  the  isle  of  Norderney,  to 
his  native  town,  Diisseldorf,  to  Italy,  and  to  England,  sketch- 
ing scenery  and  character,  now  with  the  wildest,  most  fan- 
tastic humor,  now  with  the  finest  idylHc  sensibility — letting 
his  thoughts  wander  from  poetry  to  politics,  from  criticism 
to  dreamy  revery,  and  blending  fun,  imagination,  reflection, 
and  satire  in  a  sort  of  exquisite,  every-varying  shimmer,  like 
•the  hues  of  the  opal. 

Heine's  journey  to  England  did  not  at  all  heighten  his 
regard  for  the  English.  He  calls  our  language  the  "  hiss  of 
egoism"  i^Zischlaute  des  Egoismus)  \  and  his  ridicule  of  Eng- 
lish awkwardness  is  as  merciless  as — English  ridicule  of 
V^erman  awkwardness.  His  antipathy  towards  us  seems  to 
have  grown  in  intensity,  like  many  of  his  other  antipathies; 
and  in  his  "Vermischte  Schriften"  he  is  more  bitter  than 
ever.  Let  us  quote  one  of  his  philippics,  since  bitters  are 
understood  to  be  wholesome: 

"  It  is  certainly  a  frightful  injustice  to  pronounce  sentence  of  con- 
demnation on  an  entire  people.  But,  with  regard  to  the  EngHsh, 
fnomentary  disgust  might  betray  me  into  this  injustice ;  and,  on  look- 


HEINRICH  HEINE. 


67 


mg  at  the  mass,  I  easily  forget  the  many  brave  and  noble  men  who  dis- 
tinguished themselves  by  intellect  and  love  of  freedom.  But  these,  es- 
pecially the  British  poets,  were  always  all  the  more  glaringly  in  contrast 
with  the  rest  of  the  nation  ;  they  were  isolated  martyrs  to  their  national 
relations;  and  besides,  great  geniuses  do  not  belong  to  the  particular 
land  of  their  birth:  they  scarcely  belong  to  this  earth,  the  Golgotha  of 
their  sufferings.  The  mass-  the  English  blockheads,  God  forgive  me! 
— are  hateful  to  me  in  my  inmost  soul ;  and  1  often  regard  them  not  at 
all  as  my  fellow-men,  but  as  miserable  automata — machines,  whose 
native-power  is  egoism.  In  these  moods,  it  seems  to  me  as  if  I  heard 
the  whizzing  wheel-work  by  which  they  think,  feel,  reckon,  digest, 
and  pray :  their  praying,  their  mechanical  Anglican  church-going, 
with  the  gilt  Prayer-book  under  their  arms,  their  stupid,  tiresome  Sun- 
day, their  awkward  piety,  is  most  of  all  odious  to  me.  I  am  firmly 
convinced  that  a  blaspheming  Frenchman  is  a  more  pleasing  sight  for 
the  Divinity  than  a  praying  Englishman." 

On  his  return  from  England,  Heine  was  employed  at 
Munich  in  editing  t\\Q  Allgemeinen  Politischen  Annalen ;  but 
in  1830  he  was  again  in  the  north,  and  the  news  of  the  July 
Revolution  surprised  him  on  the  Island  of  Heligoland.  He 
has  given  us  a  graphic  picture  of  his  democratic  enthusiasm 
in  those  days  in  some  letters,  apparently  written  from 
Heligoland,  which  he  has  inserted  in  his  book  on  Borne, 
We  quote  some  passages,  not  only  for  their  biographic  inter- 
est, as  showing  a  phase  of  Heine's  mental  history,  but  because 
they  are  a  specimen  of  his  power  in  that  kind  of  dithyrambic 
writing  which,  in  less  masterly  hands,  easily  becomes  ridicu- 
lous : 

"  The  thick  packet  of  newspapers- arrived  from  the  Continent  with 
these  warm,  glowing-hot  tidings.  They  were  sunbeams  wrapped  up 
in  packing-paper,  and  they  inflamed  my  soul  till  it  burst  into  the  wildest 
conflagration.  ...  It  is  all  like  a  dream  to  me  ;  especially  the  name 
Lafayette  sounds  to  me  like  a  legend  out  of  my  earliest  childhood. 
Does  he  really  sit  again  on  horseback,  commanding  the  National 
Guard?  I  almost  fear  it  may  not  be  true,  for  it  is  in  print.  I  will 
myself  go  to  Paris,  to  be  convinced  of  it  with  my  bodily  eyes.  .  .  . 
It  must  be  splendid  when  he  rides  through  the  streets,  the  citizen  of 
two  worlds,  the  godlike  old  man,  with  his  silver  locks  streaming  down 
his  sacred  shoulders.  .  .  .  He  greets,  with  his  dear  old  eyes,  the 
grandchildren  of  those  who  once  fought  with  him  for  freedom  and 
equality.  .  .  ,  It  is  now  sixty  years  since  he  returned  from  America  with 
the  Declaration  of  Human  Rights — the  decalogue  of  the  world's  new 
creed,  which  was  revealed  to  him  amid  the  thunders  and  lightnings  of 
cannon.  .  .  .  And  the  tricolored  flag  waves  again  on  the  towers  of 
Paris,  and  its  streets  resound  with  the  Marseillaise  !  ...  It  is  all  over 
with  my  yearning  for  repose.  I  know  now  again  ^\•hat  I  will  do,  what 
I  oTight  to  do,  what  I  must  do,  ...  I  am  the  son  of  the  Revolution, 


68 


GERMAN  WIT: 


and  seize  again  the  hallowed  weapons  on  wliich  my  mother  pronounced 
her  magic  benediction.  .  .  .  Flowers!  flowers!  T  will  crown  my  head 
for  the  death-fight.  And  the  lyre,  too — reach  me  the  lyre,  that  I  may 
sing  a  battle-song.  .  .  .  Words  like  flaming  stars,  that  shoot  down 
from  the  heavens,  and  burn  up  the  palaces,  and  illuminate  the  huts. 
.  .  .  Words  like  bright  javelins,  that  whirr  up  to  the  seventh  heaven, 
and  strike  the  pious  hypocrites  who  have  skulked  into  the  Holy  of 
Holies.  ...  I  am  all  joy  and  song,  all  sword  and  flame !  Perhaps, 
too,  all  delirium.  .  .  .  One  of  those  sunbeams  wrapped  in  brown  paper 
has  flown  to  my  brain,  and  set  my  thoughts  aglow.  In  \  ain  I  dip  my 
head  into  the  sea.  No  water  extinguishes  this  Greek  fire.  .  .  .  Even  the 
poor  Heligolanders  shout  for  joy,  although  they  have  only  a  sort  of  dim 
instinct  of  what  has  occurred.  The  fisherman  who  yesterday  took 
me  over  to  the  little  sand-island,  which  is  the  bathing-plaee  here,  said 
tome,  smilingly,  'The  poor  people  have  won!'  Yes,  instinctively  the 
people  comprehend  sucli  events ;  perhaps  better  than  we,  with  all  our 
means  of  knowledge.  Thus  Frau  von  Varnhagen  once  told  me  that, 
when  the  issue  of  the  battle  of  Leipzig  was  not  yet  knowr,  the  maid- 
servant suddenly  rushed  into  the  room  with  the  sorrowful  cry,  '  The 
nobles  have  won  !  '  .  .  .  This  morning  another  packet  of  newspapers 
is  come.  I  devour  them  hke  manna.  Child  that  I  am,  affecting 
details  touch  me  yet  more  than  the  momentous  whole.  Oh,  if  I  could 
but  see  the  dog  Medor !  .  .  .  The  dog  Medor  brought  his  master  his 
gun  and  cartridge-box  ;  and  when  his  master  fell,  and  was  buried  with 
his  fellow-heroes  in  the  Court  of  the  Louvre,  there  stayed  the  poor  dog, 
hke  a  monument  of  faithfulness,  sitting  motionless  on  the  grave,  day 
and  night,  eating  but  little  of  the  food  that  was  offered  him,  burying 
the  grater  part  of  it  in  the  earth,  perhaps  as  nourishment  for  his  buried 
master ! ' ' 

The  enthusiasm  which  was  kept  thus  at  a  boiling  heat  by- 
imagination  cooled  down  rapidly  when  brought  into  contact 
with  reality.  In  the  same  book  he  indicates,  in  his  caustic 
way,  the  commencement  of  that  change  in  his  political  tem- 
perature— for  it  cannot  be  called  a  change  in  opinion — which 
has  drawn  down  on  him  immense  vituperation  from  some  of 
the  patriotic  party,  but  which  seems  to  have  resulted  simply 
from  the  essential  antagonism  between  keen  wit  and  fan- 
aticism : 

' '  On  the  very  first  day  of  my  arrival  in  Paris  I  observed  that  things 
wore,  in  reality,  quite  different  colors  from  those  which  had  been  shed 
on  them,  when  in  perspective,  by  the  light  of  my  enthusiasm.  The 
silver  locks  which  I  saw  fluttering  so  majestically  on  the  shoulders  of 
Lafayette,  the  hero  of  two  worlds,  were  metamorphosed  into  a  brown 
perruque,  which  made  a  pitiable  covering  for  a  narrow  skull.  And 
even  the  dog  Medor,  which  I  visited  in  the  Court  of  the  Louvre,  and 
which,  encamped  under  tricolored  flags  and  trophies,  very  quietl) 
allowed  himself  to  be  fed — he  was  not  at  all  the  right  dog,  but  quite 
an  ordinary  brute,  who  assumed  to  himself  merits  not  his  own,  OS  often 


HEINRICH  HEINE. 


69 


happens  with  the  French  ;  and,  fikc  many  others,  he  made  a  profit 
out  of  the  glory  of  the  Revohition.  ...  He  was  pampered  and 
patronized,  perhaps  promoted  to  the  highest  posts,  while  the  true 
Medor,  some  days  after  the  battle,  modestly  slunk  out  of  sight,  Hke 
the  true  people  who  created  the  Revolution." 

That  it  was  not,  merely  interest  in  rench  politics  which 
sent  Heine  to  Paris  in  1 831,  but  aUo  a  perception  that 
German  air  was  not  friendly  to  sympathizers  in  July  revolu- 
tions, is  humorously  intimated  in  the    Gestandnisse :  " 

"  I  had  done  much  and  suffered  much,  and  when  the  sun  of  the 
July  Revolution  arose  in  France,  I  had  become  very  weary,  and 
needed  some  recreation.  Also,  my  native  air  was  ever\'  day  more 
unhealthy  for  me,  and  it  was  time  I  should  seriously  think  of  a  change 
of  climate.  I  had  visions  :  the  clouds  terrified  me,  and  made  all  sorts 
of  ugly  faces  at  me.  It  often  seemed  to  me  as  if  the  sun  were  a 
Prussian  cockade  ;  at  night  I  dreamed  of  a  hideous  black  eagle,  which 
gnawed  my  liver ;  and  I  was  very  melancholy.  Add  to  this,  I  had 
become  acquainted  with  a©  old  Berlin  Justizrath,  who  had  spent  many 
years  in  the  fortress  of  Spandau,  and  he  related  to  me  how  unpleasant 
it  is  when  one  is  obliged  to  wear  irons  in  winter.  For  myself,  I  thought 
it  very  unchristian  that  the  irons  were  not  warmed  a  trifle.  If  the 
irons  were  waiTned  a  httle  for  us  they  would  not  make  so  unpleasant 
an  impression,  and  even  chilly  natures  might  then  bear  them  very 
well ;  it  would  be  only  proper  consideration,  too,  if  the  fetters  were 
perfumed  with  essence  of  roses  and  laurels,  as  is  the  case  in  this 
country  (France).  I  asked  my  Justizrath  whether  he  often  got  oysters 
to  eat  at  Spandau  ?  He  said,  'No  ;  Spandau  was  too  far  from  the  sea.'. . 
Moreover,  he  said  meat  was  very  scarce  there,  and  there  was  no  kind 
of  volaille  except  flies,  which  fell  into  one's  soup.  .  .  .  Now,  as  I 
really  needed  some  recreation,  and  as  Spandau  is  too  far  from  the  sea 
for  oysters  to  be  got  there,  and  the  Spandau  fly-soup  did  not  seem 
very  appetizing  to  me — as,  besides  all  this,  the  Prussian  chains  are 
very  cold  in  winter,  and  could  not  be  conducive  to  my  health,  I 
resolved  to  visit  Paris," 

Since  this  time  Paris  has  been  Heine's  home,  and  his  best 
prose  works  have  been  written  either  to  inform  the  Germans 
on  French  affairs  or  to  inform  the  French  on  German  phil- 
osophy and  literature.  He  became  a  correspondent  of  the 
Allgemeinc  Zeitting,  and  his  correspondence,  which  extend^, 
'with  an  interruption  of  several  years,  from  1831  to  1844, 
forms  the  volume  entitled  "  Franzosische  Zustande"  (French 
Affairs),  and  the  second  and  thii'd  volumes  of  his  "  Vermis- 
chte  Schriftcn."  It  is  a  witty  and  often  wise  comtnentary  on 
public  men  and  public  events;  Louis  Philippe,  Casimir  Perier, 
Thiers,  Guizot,  Rothschild,  the  Catholic  party,  the  Socialist 
p  'jIa'  have  their  turn  of  satire  and  appreciation,  for  Heine 


70 


GERMAN  WIT: 


deals  out  both  with  an  impartiality  which  made  his  less  favor- 
able critics — Borne,  for  example — charge  him  with  the  rather 
incompatible  sins  of  reckless  caprice  and  venality.  Litera- 
ture and  art  alternate  with  politics  :  we  have  now  a  sketch  of 
George  Sand,  or  a  description  of  one  of  Horace  Vernet's 
pictures;  now  a  criticism  pf  Victor  Hu^o,  or  of  Liszt; 
now  an  irresistible  caricature  of  Spontini,  or  Kalk- 
brenner  ;  and  occasionally  the  predominant  satire  is  relieved 
by  a  fine  saying  or  a  genial  word  of  admiration.  And  all 
is  done  with  that  airy  lightness,  yet  precision  of  touch,  which 
distinguishes  Heine  beyond  any  living  writer.  The  charge 
of  venality  was  loudly  made  against  Heine  in  Germany :  first, 
it  was  said  that  he  was  paid  to  write  ;  then,  that  he  was  paid 
to  abstain  from  writing;  and  the  accusations  were  supposed 
to  have  an  irrefragable  basis  in  the  fact  that  he  accepted  a 
stipend  from  the  French  government.  He  has  never  attemp- 
ted to  conceal  the  reception  of  that  stipend,  and  we  think  his 
statement  (in  the  "Vermischte  Schriften")  of  the  circum- 
stances under  which  it  was  offered  and  received  is  a  sufficient 
vindication  of  himself  and  M.  Guizot  from  any  dishonor  in 
the  matter. 

It  may  be  readily  imagined  that  Heine,  with  so  large  a 
share  of  the  Gallic  element  as  he  has  in  his  composition,  was 
soon  at  ease  in  Parisian  society,  and  the  years  here  were 
bright  with  intellectual  activity  and  social  enjoyment.  "  His 
wit,"  wrote  August  Lewald,  **is  a  perpetual  gushing  fountain  ; 
he  throws  off  the  most  delicious  descriptions  with  amazing 
facility,  and  sketches  the  most  comic  characters  in  conversa- 
tion." Such  a  man  could  not  be  neglected  in  Paris,  and  Heine 
was  sought  on  all  sides — as  a  guest  in  distinguished  salonSy 
as  a  possible  proselyte  in  the  circle  of  the  Saints-Sim.onians. 
His  literary  productiveness  seems  to  have  been  furthered  by 
this  congenial  life,  which,  however,  was  soon,  to  some  extent, 
embittered  by  the  sense  of  exile;  for,  since  1835,  both  his 
works  and  his  person  have  been  the  object  of  denunciation 
by  the  German  government.  Between  1833  ^^45 
appeared  the  four  volumes  of  the  "Salon,"  "Die  Roman- 
tische  Schule"  (both  written,  in  the  first  instance,  in  French) ; 
the  book  on  Borne;  "  Atta  Troll,"  a  romantic  poem;  "Deut- 
schland,"  an  exquisitely  humorous  poem,  describing  his  last 
visit  to  Germany,  and  containing  some  grand  passages  of  ser- 
ious writing;  and  the  "Neue  Gedichte,"  a  collection  of  lyri- 


HEINE  ICH  HEINE. 


71 


cal  poems.  Among  the  most  interesting  of  his  prose  works 
are  the  second  volume  of  the  "Salon,"  which  contains  a  sur- 
vey of  religion  and  philosophy  in  Germany,  and  the  "  Roman- 
tische  Schule,"  a  delightful  introduction  to  that  phase  of  Ger- 
man literature  known  as  the  Romantic  School.  The  book 
on  Borne,  which  appeared  in  1840,  two  or  three  years  after 
the  death  of  that  writer,  excited  great  indignation  in  Germany, 
as  a  wreaking  of  vengeance  on  the  dead,  an  insult  to  the 
memory  of  a  man  who  had  worked  and  suffered  in  the 
cause  of  freedom — a  cause  which  was  Heine's  own. 

Borne,  we  may  observe  parenthetically,  for  the  information 
of  those  who  are  not  familiar  with  recent  German  literature, 
was  a  remarkable  political  writer  of  the  ultra-Liberal  party  in 
Germany,  who  resided  in  Paris  at  the  same  time  as  Heine — a 
man  of  stern,  uncompromising  partisanship  and  bitter  humor. 
Without  justifying  Heine's  production  of  this  book,  we  see 
excuses  for  him  which  should  temper  the  condemnation 
passed  on  it.  There  was  a  radical  opposition  of  nature 
between  him  and  Borne:  to  use  his  own  distinction,  Heine  is 
a  Hellene— sensuous,  realistic,  exquisitely  alive  to  the  beau- 
tiful ;  while  Borne  was  a  Nazarene — ascetic,  spiritualistic, 
despising  the  pure  artist  as  destitute  of  earnestness.  Heine 
has  too  keen  a  perception  of  practical  absurdities  and  damag- 
ing exaggerations  ever  to  become  a  thorough  going  parti- 
san; and  with  a  love  of  freedom,  a  faith  in  the  ultimate  tri- 
umph of  democratic  principles,  of  which  we  see  no  just  rea- 
son to  doubt  fhe  genuineness  and  consistency,  he  has  been 
unable  to  satisfy  more  zealous  and  one-sided  Liberals  by  giv- 
ing his  adhesion  to  their  views  and  measures,  or  by  adopting 
a  denunciatory  tone  against  those  in  the  opposite  ranks. 
Borne  could  not  forgive  what  he  regarded  as  Heine's  epicu- 
rean indifference  and  artistic  dalliance,  and  heat  length  gave 
vent  to  his  antipathy  in  savage  attacks  on  him  through  the 
press,  accusing  him  of  utterly  lacking  character  and  princi- 
ple, and  even  of  writing  under  the  influence  of  venal  motives. 
To  these  attacks  Heine  remained  absolutely  mute — from 
contempt,  according  to  his  own  account ;  but  the  retort, 
which  he  resolutely  refrained  from  making  during  Borne's 
life,  comes  in  this  volume,  published  after  his  death,  with  the 
concentrated  force  of  long-gathering  thunder.  The  utterly 
inexcusable  part  of  the  book  is  the  caricature  of  Borne's  friend. 
Madame  Wohl,  and  the  scurrilous  insinuations  concerning 


72 


GERMAN  WIT: 


Bbrne's  domestic  life.  It  is  said,  we  know  not  with  how 
much  truth,  that  Heine  had  to  answer  for  these  in  a  duel 
with  Madame  Wohl's  husband,  and  that,  after  receiving  a 
serious  wound,  he  promised  to  withdraw  the  offensive  mat- 
ter from  a  future  edition.  That  edition,  however,  has  not 
been  called  for.  Whatever  else  we  may  think  of  the  book, 
it  is  impossible  to  deny  its  transcendent  talent — the  dramatic 
vigor  with  which  Borne  is  made  present  to  us,  the  critical 
acumen  with  which  he  is  characterized,  and  the  wonderful 
play  of  wit,  pathos,  and  thoutght  which  runs  through  the 
whole.  But  we  will  let  Heine  speak  for  himself ;  and,  first,  we 
will  give  part  of  his  graphic  description  of  the  way  in  which 
Borne's  mind  and  manners  grated  on  his  taste  : 

"  To  the  disgust  which,  in  intercourse  with  Borne,  I  was  in  danger 
of  feeling  towards  those  who  surrounded  him,  was  added  the  annoy- 
ance I  felt  from  his  perpetual  talk  about  pohtics.  Nothing  but  politi- 
cal argument,  and  again  political  argument,  even  at  table,  where  he 
managed  to  hunt  me  out.  At  dinner,  when  I  so  gladly  forget  all  the 
vexations  of  the  world,  he  spoiled  the  best  dishes  for  me  by  his  patriotic 
gall,  which  he  poured  as  a  bitter  sauce  over  everything.  Calf's  feet, 
a  la  inaitre  d'  hotel,  then  my  innocent  bonne  bouche,  he  completely 
spoiled  me  for  Job's  tidings  from  Germany,  which  he  scraped  together 
out  of  the  most  unrehable  newspapers.  And  then  his  accursed  remarks, 
which  spoiled  one's  appetite!  ...  This  was  a  sort  of  table-talk 
which  did  not  greatly  exhilarate  me,  and  I  avenged  myself  by  affect- 
ing an  excessive,  almost  impassioned  indifference  for  the  objects  of 
Borne's  enthusiasm.  For  example,  Borne  was  indignant  that  immedi- 
ately on  my  arrival  in  Paris  I  had  nothing  better  to  do  than  to  write  for 
German  papers  a  long  account  of  the  Exhibition  of  Pictures.  I  omit 
all  discussion  as  to  whether  that  interest  in  art  which  induced  me  to 
undertake  this  work  was  so  utterly  irreconcilable  with  the  revolutionary 
interests  of  the  day  ;  but  Borne  saw  in  it  a  proof  of  my  indifference 
towards  the  sacred  Cause  of  humanity,  and  I  could  in  my  turn  spoil 
the  taste  of  his  patriotic  Sauerkraut  for  him  by  talking  all  dinner-time 
of  nothing  but  pictures,  of  Robert's  Reapers,  Horace  Vernet's 
Judith,  and  Scheffer's  Faust.  .  .  .  That  I  never  thought  it  worth  while 
to  discuss  my  political  principles  with  him  it  is  needless  to  say  ;  and 
once  when  he  declared  that  he  had  found  a  contradiction  in  m.y  writ- 
ings, I  satisfied  myself  with  the  ironical  answer,  '  You  are  mistaken,  mon 
cher ;  such  contradictions  never  occur  in  my  works,  for  always  before 
I  begin  to  write  I  read  over  the  statement  of  my  political  principles  in 
my  previous  writings,  that  I  may  not  contradict  myself,  and  that  no 
one  may  be  able  to  reproach  me  with  apostasy  from  my  liberal  princi- 
ples.' " 

And  here  is  his  own  account  of  the  spirit  in  which  the 
book  was  written : 


HETNRTCH  HETNE.  jS 

"  T  was  never  liornc's  friend ,  nor  was  T  ever  his  enemy.  The 
displeasure  which  he  cnnld  oftfn  «  x'  He  in  mc  was  never  very  import- 
ant, and  he  atoned  for  it  siifheitiilly  by  the  cold  silence  which  T 
opposed  to  all  his  accusations  and  raillery.  While  he  lived  I  wrote 
not  a  line  against  him,  I  never  thought  about  him,  I  ignored  him 
completely  ;  and  that  enraged  him  beyond  measure.  If  I  now  speak 
of  him.  1  do  so  neither  out  of  enthusiasm  nor  out  of  uneasiness;  I  am 
conscious  of  the  coolest  impartiality.  I  write  here  neither  an  apology 
nor  a  critique,  and  as  in  painting  the  man  I  go  on  my  own  observation, 
the  image  I  present  of  him  ought,  perhaps,  to  be  regarded  as  a  real 
portrait.  And  such  a  monument  is  due  to  him — to  the  great  wrestler 
who,  in  the  arena  of  our  political  games,  wrestled  so  courageously, 
and  earned,  if  not  the  laurel,  certamly  the  crown  of  oak  leaves.  I 
give  an  image  with  his  true  features,  without  idealization — the  more 
like  him  the  more  honorable  for  his  memory.  He  was  neither  a 
genius  nor  a  hero;  he  was  no  Olympian  God.  He  was  a  man,  a 
denizen  of  this  earth ;  he  was  a  good  writer  and  a  great  patriot.  .  .  . 
Beautiful,  dehcious  peace,  which  I  feel  at  this  moment  in  the  depths 
of  my  soul !  thou  rewardest  me  sufficiently  for  everything  I  have 
done  and  for  everything  I  have  despised.  ...  I  shall  defend  myself 
neither  from  the  reproach  of  indifference  nor  from  the  suspicion  of 
venahty.  I  have  for  years,  during  the  life  of  the  insinuator,  held 
such  self-justification  unworthy  of  me  ;  now  even  decency  demands 
silence.  That  would  be  a  frightful  spectacle  ! — polemics  between 
Death  and  Exile!  Dost  thou  stretch  out  to  me  a  beseeching  hand 
from  the  grave  ?  Without  rancor  I  reach  mine  towards  thee.  .  .  .  See 
how  noble  it  is  and  pure !  It  was  never  soiled  by  pressing  the  hands 
of  the  mob,  any  more  than  by  the  impure  gold  of  the  people's 
enemy.  In  reahty  thou  hast  never  injured  me.  ...  In  all  thy 
insinuations  there  is  not  a  louis  d'ors  worth  of  truth." 

In  one  of  these  years  Heine  was  married,  and,  in  deference 
to  the  sentiments  of  his  wife,  married  according  to  the  rites 
of  the  Catholic  Church.  On  this  fact  busy  rumor  afterwards 
founded  the  story  of  his  conversion  to  Catholicism,  and 
could,  of  course,  name  the  day  and  the  spot  on  which  he 
abjured  Protestantism.  In  his  Gestandnisse  "  Heine  pub- 
Hshes  a  denial  of  this  rumor :  less,  he  says,  for  the  sake  of 
depriving  the  Catholics  of  the  solace  they  may  derive  from 
their  belief  in  a  new  convert,  than  in  order  to  cut  off  from 
another  party  the  more  spiteful  satisfaction  of  bewailing  his 
instability : 

"  That  statement  of  time  and  place  was  entirely  correct.  I  was  act- 
ually  on  the  specified  day  in  the  specified  church,  which  was,  more- 
over, a  Jesuit  church — namely,  St.  Sulpice;  and  I  then  went  through 
a  religious  act.  But  this  act  was  no  odious  abjuration,  but  a  very 
innocent  conjugation  ;  that  is  to  say,  my  marriage,  already  performed 
according  to  the  civil  law,  there  received  the  ecclesiastical  consecra- 


74 


GERMAN  WIT: 


tion,  because  my  wife,  Mhose  family  are  stanch  Catholics,  would  not 
have  thought  her  marriage  sacred  enough  without  such  a  ceremony. 
And  I  would  on  no  account  cause  this  beloved  being  any  uneasiness 
or  disturbance  in  her  religious  views. ' ' 

For  sixteen  years — from  1831  to  1847 — Heine  lived  that 
rapid,  concentrated  life  which  is  known  only  in  Paris ;  but 
then,  alas!  stole  on  the  "days  of  darkness,"  and  they  were 
to  be  many.  In  1847  he  felt  the  approach  of  the  terrible 
spinal  disease  which  has  for  seven  years  chained  him  to  his 
bed  in  acute  suffering.  The  last  time  he  went  out  of  doors, 
he  tells  us,  was  in  May,  1848  : 

"With  difficulty  I  dragged  myself  to  the  Louvre,  and  I  almost  sank 
down  as  I  entered  the  magnificent  hall  where  the  ever-blessed 
goddess  of  beauty,  our  beloved  Lady  of  Mil o,  stands  on  her  pedestal. 
At  her  feet  I  lay  long,  and  wept  so  bitterly  that  a  stone  must  have 
pitied  me.  The  goddess  looked  compassionately  on  me,  but  at  the 
same  time  disconsolately,  as  if  she  would  say  :  Dost  thou  not  see, 
then,  that  I  have  no  arms,  and  thus  cannot  help  thee  ?" 

Since  1848,  then,  this  poet,  whom  the  lovely  objects  ot 
Nature  have  always  haunted  like  a  passion,"  has  not  descen- 
ded from  the  second  story  of  a  Parisian  house;  this  man  ot 
hungry  intellect  has  been  shut  out  from  all  direct  observation 
of  life,  all  contact  with  society,  except  such  as  is  derived  from 
visitors  to  his  sick-room.  The  terrible  nervous  disease  has 
affected  his  eyes ;  the  sight  of  one  is  utterly  gone,  and  he  can 
only  raise  the  hd  of  the  other  by  lifting  it  with  his  finger. 
Opium  alone  is  the  beneficent  genius  that  stills  his  pain., 
We  hardly  know  whether  to  call  it  an  alleviation  or  an  inten- 
sification of  the  torture  that  Heine  retains  his  mental  vigor, 
his  poetic  imagination,  and  his  incisive  wit;  for  if  his  intel- 
lectual activity  fills  up  a  blank,  it  widens  the  sphere  of  suffer- 
ing. His  brother  described  him  in  1851  as  still,  in  moments 
when  the  hand  of  pain  was  not  too  heavy  on  him,  the  same 
Heinrich  Heine,  poet  and^  satirist  by  turns.  In  such  mom- 
ents, he  would  narrate  the  strangest  things  in  the  gravest 
manner.  But  when  he  came  to  an  end,  he  would  roguishly 
lift  up  the  lid  of  his  right  eye  with  his  finger  to  see  the  impres- 
sion he  had  produced;  and  if  his  audience  had  been  listen- 
ing with  a  serious  face,  he  would  break  into  Homeric  laugh- 
ter. We  have  other  proof  than  personal  testimony  that 
Heine's  disease  allows  his  genius  to  retain  much  of  its  energy, 


HEINRICH  HEINE. 


75 


in  the  "Romanzero,"  a  volume  of  poems  publisbed  in  185 1, 
and  written  chiefly  during  the  first  three  years  of  his  illness; 
and  in  the  first  volume  of  the  "Vermischte  Schriften,"  also 
the  product  of  recent  years.  Very  plaintive  is  the  poet's  own 
description  of  his  condition,  in  the  epilogue  to  the  ''Roman- 
zero  :" 

"  Do  T  really  exist?  My  body  is  so  shrunken  that  T  am  hardly  any- 
thing but  a  voice  ;  and  my  bed  reminds  me  of  the  singing  grave  of  the 
magician  Merhn,  which  Ues  in  the  forest  of  Brozehand,  in  Brittany, 
under  tall  oaks  whose  tops  soar  like  green  flames  towards  heaven. 
Alas !  I  envy  thee  those  trees  and  the  fresh  breeze  that  moves  their 
branches,  brother  Merlin,  for  no  green  leaf  rustles  about  my  mattress- 
grave  in  Paris,  where  early  and  late  I  hear  nothing  but  the  rolling  of 
vehicles,  hammering,  quarrelhng,  and  piano-strumming.  A  grave 
without  repose,  death  without  the  privileges  of  the  dead,  who  have  no 
debts  to  pay,  and  need  write  neither  letters  nor  books — that  is  a  piteous 
condition.  Long  ago  the  measure  has  been  taken  for  my  coffin  and 
for  my  necrology  ;  but  I  die  so  slowly  that  the  process  is  tedious  for 
me  as  well  as  my  friends.  But  patience;  everything  has  an  end. 
You  will  one  day  find  the  booth  closed  where  the  puppet-show  of  my 
humor  has  so  often  delighted  you." 

As  early  as  1850,  it  was  rumored  that  since  Heine's  illness 
a  change  had  taken  place  in  his  religious  views  ;  and  as  rumor 
seldom  stops  short  of  extremes,  it  was  soon  said  that  he  had 
become  a  thorough  pietist,  Catholics  and  Protestants  by  turns 
claiming  him  as  a  convert.  Such  a  change  in  so  uncomprom- 
ising an  iconoclast,  in  a  man  who  had  been  so  zealous  in  his 
negations  as  Heine,  naturally  excited  considerable  sensation 
in  the  camp  he  was  supposed  to  have  quitted,  as  well  as  in 
that  he  was  supposed  to  have  joined.  In  the  second  volume 
of  the  Salon,"  and  in  the  Romantische  Schule,"  written  in 
1834  and  1835,  the  doctrine  of  Pantheism  is  dwelt  on  with 
a  fervor  and  unmixed  seriousness  which  show  that  Pantheism 
was  then  an  animating  faith  to  Heine,  and  he  attacks  what  he 
considers  the  false  spiritualism  and  asceticism  of  Christianity 
as  the  enemy  of  true  beauty  in  art,  and  of  social  well-being. 
Now,  however,  it  was  said  that  Heine  had  recanted  -all  his 
heresies;  but  from  the  fact  that  visitors  to  his  sick-room 
brought  away  very  various  impressions  as  to  his  actual  relig- 
ious views,  it  seemed  probable  that  his  love  of  mystification 
had  found  a  tempting  opportunity  for  exercise  on  this  sub- 
ject, and  that,-  as  one  of  his  friends  said,  he  was  not  inclined 
to  pour  out  unmixed  wine  to  those  who  asked  for  a  sample 


76 


GERMAN  WJT: 


out  of  mere  curiosity.  At  length,  in  the  epilogue  to  the 
"  Romanzero,"  dated  1851,  there  appeared,  amid  much  mys- 
tifying banter,  a  declaration  that  he  had  embraced  Theism 
and  the  belief  in  a  future  life  ;  and  what  chiefly  lent  an  air  of 
seriousness  and  reliability  to  this  affirmation  was  the  fact 
that  he  took  care  to  accompany  it  with  certain  negations : 

"As  concerns  myself,  I  can  boast  of  no  particular  progress  in  poli- 
tics; I  adhered  (after  1848)  to  the  same  democratic  principles  which 
had  the  homage  of  my  youth,  and  for  which  I  have  ever  since  glowed 
with  increasing  fervor.  In  theology,  on  the  contrary,  I  must  accuse 
myself  of  retrogression,  since,  as  I  have  already  confessed,  I  returned 
to  the  old  superstition — to  a  personal  God.  This  fact  is,  once  for  all, 
not  to  be  snfled,  as  many  enlightened  and  well-meaning  friends  would 
fain  have  had  it.  But  I  must  expressly  contradict  the  report  that  my 
retrograde  movement  has  carried  me  as  far  as  to  the  threshold  of  a 
church,  and  that  I  have  even  been  received  into  her  lap.  No:  my 
religious  convictions  and  views  have  remained  free  from  any  tincture 
of  ecclesiasticism ;  no  chiming  of  bells  has  allured  me,  no  altar- 
candles  have  dazzled  me.  I  have  dallied  with  no  dogmas,  and  have 
not  utterly  renounced  my  reason." 

This  sounds  like  a  serious  statement.  But  what  shall  we 
say  to  a  convert  who  plays  with  his  newly  acquired  belief  in 
a  future  life  as  Heine  does  in  the  very  next  page  ?  He  says 
to  his  reader: 

"Console  thyself;  we  shall  meet  again  in  a  better  world,  where  I 
also  mean  to  write  thee  better  books.  I  take  for  granted  that  my 
health  will  there  be  improved,  and  that  Swedenborg  has  not  deceived 
me.  He  relates,  namely,  with  great  confidence,  that  we  shall  peace- 
fully carry  on  our  old  occupations  in  the  other  world,  just  as  we  have 
done  in  this  ;  that  we  shall  there  preserve  our  individuahty  unaltered, 
and  that  death  will  produce  no  pardcular  change  in  our  organic  deve- 
lopment. Swedenborg  is  a  thoroughly  honorable  fellow,  and  quite 
worthy  of  credit  in  what  he  tells  us  about  the  other  world,  where  he 
saw  with  his  own  eyes  the  persons  who  had  played  a  great  part  on 
our  earth.  Most  of  them,  he  says,  remained  unchanged,  and  busied 
themselves  with  the  same  things  as  formerly  ;  they  remained  stationary, 
were  old-fashioned,  rococo — which  now  and  then  produced  a  ludi- 
crous effect.  For  example,  our  dear  Dr.  Martin  Luther  kept  fast  by 
his  doctrine  of  Grace,  about  which  he  had  for  three  hundred  years 
daily  written  down  the  same  mouldy  arguments — just  in  the  same  way 
as  the  late  Baron  Ekstein,  who  during  twenty  years  printed  in  the 
Allgemeine  Zeitung  one  and  the  same  article,  perpetually  chewing 
over  again  the  old  cud  of  Jesuitical  doctrine.  But,  as  we  have  said, 
all  persons  who  once  figured  here  below  were  not  found  by  Sweden- 
borg in  such  a  state  of  fossil  immutability  :  many  had  considerably- 
developed  their  character,  both  for  good  and  evil,  in  the  other  world  ; 
;ind  this  gave  risc^  Xo  some  singular  results.    Some  who  had  been  her- 


MET N R  ICH  HEINE. 


77 


oes  and  saints  on  earth  had  fhere  sunk  into  scamps  and  good-for- 
nothings  ;  and  there  were  examples,  too,  of  a  contrary  transformation. 
For  instance,  the  fumes  of  self-conceit  mounted  to  St.  Anthony's  head 
when  he  learned  what  immense  veneration  and  adoration  had  been 
paid  to  him  by  all  Christendom  ;  and  he  who  here  below  withstood 
the  most  terrible  temptations,  was  now  quite  an  impertinent  rascal 
and  dissolute  gallows-bird,  who  vied  with  his  pig  in  rolling  himself  in 
the  mud.  The  chaste  Susanna,  from  having  been  excessively  vain  of 
her  virtue,  which  she  thought  indomitable,  came  to  a  shameful  fall, 
and  she  who  once  so  gloriously  resisted  the  two  old  men,  was  a  victim 
to  the  seductions  of  the  young  Absalom,  the  son  of  David.  On  the 
contrary,  Lot's  daughters  had  in  the  lapse  of  time  become  very  vir- 
tuous, and  passed  in  the  other  world  for  models  of  propriety  :  the  old 
man,  alas  !  had  stuck  to  the  wine-flask." 

In  his  "Gestandnisse,"  the  retraction  of  former  opinions 
and  profession  of  Theism  are  renewed,  but  in  a  strain  of 
irony  that  repels  our  sympathy  and  baffles  our  psychology. 
Yet  what  strange,  deep  pathos  is  mingled  with  the  audacity 
of  the  following  passage : 

"What  avails  it  me,  that  enthusiastic  youths  and  maidens  crown 
my  marble  bust  with  laurel,  when  the  withered  hands  of  an  aged 
nurse  are  pressing  Spanish  flies  behind  my  ears  ?  What  avails  it  me, 
that  all  the  roses  of  Shiraz  glow  and  waft  incense  for  me  ?  Alas ! 
Shiraz  is  two  thousand  miles  from  the  Rue  d' Amsterdam,  where,  in 
the  wearisome  loneliness  of  my  sick-room,  I  get  no  scent  except  it  be, 
perhaps,  the  perfume  of  warmed  towels.  Alas !  God's  satire  weighs 
heavily  on  me.  The  great  Author  of  the  universe,  the  Aristophanes 
of  Heaven,  was  bent  on  demonstrating,  with  crushing  force,  to  me, 
the  httle,  earthly,  German  Aristophanes,  how  my  wittiest  sarcasms  are 
only  pitiful  attempts  at  jestipg  in  comparison  with  his,  and  how  mis- 
erably I  am  beneath  him  in  humor,  in  colosssl  mockery.  " 

For  our  own  part,  we  regard  the  paradoxical  irreverence 
with  which  Heine  professes  his  theoretical  reverence  as 
pathological,  as  the  diseased  exhibition  of  a  predominant 
tendency  urged  into  anomalous  action  by  the  pressure  ol 
pain  and  mental  privation^ — as  the  delirium  of  starved 
of  its  proper  nourishment.  It  is  not  for  us  to  condemn,  who 
have  never  had  the  same  burden  laid  on  us;  it  is  not  for 
pigmies  at  their  ease  to  criticise  the  writhings  of  the  Titan 
chained  to  the  rock. 

On  one  other  point  we  must  touch  before  quitting  Heine's 
personal  history.  There  is  a  standing  accusation  against 
him  in  some  quarters  of  wanting  political  principle,  of  wish- 
ing to  denationalize  himself,  and  of  indulging  in  insults 
against  his  native  country.    Whatever  ground  may  exist  for 


78 


GERMAN  WIT: 


these  accusations,  that  ground  is  not,  so  far  as  we  see,  to  be 
found  in  his  writings.  He  may  not  have  much  faith  in  Ger- 
man revolutions  and  revolutionists ;  experience,  in  his  case 
as  in  that  of  others,  may  have  thrown  his  millennial  anticipa- 
tions into  more  distant  perspective ;  but  we  see  no  evidence 
that  he  has  ever  swerved  from  his  attachment  to  the  princi- 
ples of  freedom,  or  written  anything  which  to  a  philo- 
sophic mind  is  incompatible  with  true  patriotism.  He  has 
expressly  denied  the  report  that  he  wished  to  become 
naturalized  in  France;  and  his  yearning  towards  his  native 
land  and  the  accents  of  his  native  language  is  expressed 
with  a  pathos  the  more  reliable  from  the  fact  that  he  is  spar- 
ing in  such  effusions.  We  do  not  see  why  Heine's  satire  of 
the  blunders  and  foibles  of  his  fellow-countrymen  should  be 
denounced  as  the  crime  of  lese  patrie,  any  more  than  the 
political  caricatures  of  any  other  satirist.  The  real  offences 
of  Heine  are  his  occasional  coarseness  and  his  unscrupulous 
personalities,  which  are  reprehensible,  not  because  they  are 
directed  against  his  fellow-countrymen,  but  because  they  are 
personalities.  That  these  offences  have  their  precedents  in 
men  whose  memory  the  world  delights  to  honor  does  not 
remove  their  turpitude,  but  it  is  a  fact  which  should  modify 
our  condemnation  in  a  particular  case — unless,  indeed,  we 
are  to  deliver  our  judgments  on  a  principle  of  compensation, 
making  up  for  our  indulgence  in  one  direction  by  our 
severity  in  another.  On  this  ground  of  coarseness  and 
personality,  a  true  bill  may  be  found  against  Heine — not,  we 
think,  on  the  ground  that  he  has  laughed  at  what  is  laughable 
in  his  compatriots.  Here  is  a  specimen  of  the  satire  under 
which  we  suppose  German  patriots  wince: 

"  Rhenish  Bavaria  was  to  be  the  starting-point  of  the  German  revo- 
lution. Zwiebriicken  was  the  Bethlehem  in  which  the  infant  Saviour — 
Freedom — lay  in  the  cradle,  and  gave  whimpering  promise  of  redeem- 
ing the  world.  Near  his  cradle  bellowed  many  an  ox,  who  afterwards, 
when  his  horns  w^ere  reckoned  on,  showed  himself  a  very  harmless  brute. 
It  was  confidently  believed  that  the  German  revolution  would  begin  in 
Zwiebriicken,  and  everything  was  there  ripe  for  an  outbreak.  But,  as 
has  been  hinted,  the  tender-heartedness  of  some  persons  frustrated 
that  illegal  undertaking.  For  exa'mple,  among  the  Bipontine  conspir- 
ators there  was  a  tremendous  braggart,  who  was  always  loudest  in  his 
rage,  who  boiled  over  with  the  hatred  of  tyranny,  and  this  man  was 
fixed  on  to  strike  the  first  blow,  by  cutting  down  a  sentinel  who  kept  an 
important  post.  .  .  '  What !  '  cried  the  man,  when  this  order  was  given 
him — 'what! — me!    Can  you  expect  so  horrible,  so  bloodthirsty  an 


HEINRICH  HEINE. 


79 


act  of  me?  I — /,  kill  an  innocent  sentinel  ?  I,  who  am  father  of  a  fam- 
ily !  And  this  sentinel  is  perhaps  also  father  of  a  family.  One  fathei 
of  a  family  kill  another  father  of  a  family  ?    Yes  !    Kill — murder  !  '  " 

In  political  matters,  Heine,  like  all  men  whose  intellect  and 
taste  predominate  too  far  over  their  impulses  to  allow  of 
their  becoming  partisans,  is  offensive  alike  to  the  aristocrat 
and  the  democrat.  By  the  one  he  is  denounced  as  a  man 
who  holds  incendiary  principles,  by  the  other  as  a  half-hearted 
"  trimmer."  He  has  no  sympathy,  as  he  says,  with  that 
vague,  barren  pathos,  that  useless  effervescence  of  enthusiasm, 
which  plunges,  with  the  spirit  of  a  martyr,  into  an  ocean  of 
generalities,  and  which  always  reminds  me  of  the  American 
sailor,  who  had  so  fervent  an  enthusiasm  for  General  Jackson 
that  he  at  last  sprang  from  the  top  of  a  mast  into  the  sea,  cry- 
ing,   I  die  for  General  Jackson  !  " 

"  But  thou  liest,  Brutus,  thou  liest,  Cassius,  and  thou,  too,  hest, 
Asinius,  in  maintaining  that  my  ridicule  attacks  those  ideas  which  are 
the  precious  acquisition  of  Humanity,  and  for  which  I  myself  have  so 
striven  and  suffered.  No !  for  the  very  reason  that  those  ideas  con- 
stantly hover  before  the  poet  in  glorious  splendor  and  majesty,  he  is 
the  more  irresistibly  overcome  by  laughter  when  he  sees  how  rudely, 
awkwardly,  and  clumsily  those  ideas  are  seized  and  mirrored  in  the 
contracted  minds  of  contemporaries.  .  .  .  There  are  mirrors  which 
have  so  rough  a  surface  that  even  an  Apollo  reflected  in  them  becomes 
a  caricature,  and  excites  our  laughter.  But  we  laugh  then  only  at  the 
caricature,  not  at  the  god.' \ 

For  the  rest,  why  should  we  demand  of  Heine  that  he 
should  be  a  hero,  a  patriot,  a  solemn  prophet,  any  more  than 
we  should  demand  of  a  gazelle  that  it  should  draw  well  in 
harness?  Nature  has  not  made  him  of  her  sterner  stuff,  not 
of  iron  and  adamant,  but  of  pollen  of  flowers,  the  juice  of  the 
grape,  and  Puck's  mischievous  brain,  plenteously  mixing  also 
the  dews  of  kindly  affection  and  the  gold-dust  of  noble 
thoughts.  It  is,  after  all,  a  tribiite  which  his  enemies  pay 
him  when  they  utter  their  bitterest  dictum  ;  namely,  that  he 
is  nur  Dichter'' — only  a  poet.  Let  us  accept  this  point 
of  view  for  the  present,  and,  leaving  all  consideration  of  him 
as  a  man,  look  at  him  simply  as  a  poet  and  literary  artist. 

Heine  is  essentially  a  lyric  poet.  The  finest  products  of 
his  genius  are 

"  Short  swallow-flights  of  song  that  dip 
Their  wings  in  tears,  and  skim  away  ;  " 


8o 


GERMAN  WIT: 


and  they  are  so  emphatically  songs,  that,  in  reading  them, 
we  feel  as  if  each  must  have  a  twin  melody  born  in  the 
same  moment  and  by  the  same  inspiration.  Heine  is  too 
impressible  and  mercurial  for  any  sustained  production :  even 
in  his  short  lyrics  his  tears  sometimes  pass  into  laughter,  and 
his  laughter  into  tears;  and  his  longer  poems,  "  Atta  Trail" 
and  ^'Deutschland,"  are  full  of  Ariosto-like  transitions.  His 
song  has  a  wide  compass  of  notes :  he  can  take  us  to  the 
shores  of  the  Northern  Sea  and  thrill  us  by  the  somber  sub- 
limity of  his  pictures  and  dreamy  fancies;  he  can  draw  forth 
our  tears  by  the  voice  he  gives  to  our  own  sorrows,  or  to 
the  sorrows  of  "Poor  Peter;"  he  can  throw  a  cold  shudder 
over  us  by  a  mysterious  legend,  a  ghost- story,  or  a  still  more 
ghastly  rendering  of  hard  reality;  he  can  charm  us  by  a 
quiet  idyl,  shake  us  with  laughter  at  his  overflowing  fun, 
or  give  us  a  piquant  sensation  of  surprise  by  the  ingenuity 
of  his  transitions  from  the  lofty  to  the  ludicrous.  This  last 
power  is  not,  indeed,  essentially  poetical;  but  only  a  poet 
can  use  it  with  the  same  success  as  Heine,  for  only  a  poet 
can  poise  our  emotion  and  expectation  at  such  a  height  as 
to  give  effect  to  the  sudden  fall.  Heine's  greatest  power  as 
a  poet  lies  in  his  simple  pathos,  in  the  ever-varied  but 
always  natural  expression  he  has  given  to  the  tender 
emotions.  We  may,  perhaps,  indicate  this  phase  of  his 
genius  by  referring  to  Wordsworth's  beautiful  little  poem, 
"She  dwelt  among  the  untrodden  ways;"  the  conclusion — 

"  She  dwelt  alone,  and  few  could  know 

When  Lucy  ceased  to  be  ; 
But  she  is  in  her  grave,  and  oh  ' 

The  difference  to  me — " 

is  entirely  in  Heine's  manner ;  and  so  is  Tennyson's  poem  of 
a  dozen  hnes,  called  ''Circumstance."  Both  these  poems 
have  Heine's  pregnant  simplicity.  But,  lest  this  comparison 
should  mislead,  we  must  say  that  there  is  no  general  resem- 
blance between  either  Word.sworth  or  Tennyson  and  Heine. 
Their  greatest  qualities  lie  quite  away  from  the  light,  delicate 
lucidity,  the  easy,  rippling  music,  of  Heine's  style.  The  dis- 
tinctive charm  of  his  lyrics  may  best  be  seen  by  comparing 
them  with  Goethe's.  Both  have  the  same  masterly,  finished 
simplicity  and  rhythmic  grace;  but  there  is  more  thought 
mingled  with  Goethe's  feeling ;  his  lyrical  genius  is  a  vessel 


BEINR  JCH  HEINE. 


8l 


that  draws  more  water  tlian  Heine's,  and  though  it  seems  to 
ghde  along  with  equal  ease,  we  have  a  sense  of  greater  weight 
and  force  accompanying  the  grace  of  its  movement.  But, 
for  this  very  reason,  Heine  touches  our  hearts  more  strongly; 
his  songs  are  all  music  and  feeling ;  they  are  like  birds  that 
not  only  enchant  us  with' their  delicious  notes,  but  nestle 
against  us  with  their  soft  breasts,  and  make  us  feel  the  agi- 
tated beating  of  their  hearts.  He  indicates  a  whole  sad  his- 
tory in  a  single  quatrain:  there  is  not  an  image  in  it,  not  a 
thought;  but  it  is  beautiful,  simple,  and  perfect  as  a  "big, 
round  tear;"  it  is  pure  feeling  breathed  in  pure  music: 

'  Anfangs  wollt'  ich  fast  verzagen 
Und  ich  glaubt'  ich  trug  es  nie, 
Und  ich  hab'  es  doch  getragen, — 
Aber  fragt  mich  nur  nicht,  wie."  * 

He  excels  equally  in  the  more  imaginative  expression  of 
feeling ;  he  represents  it  by  a  brief  image,  like  a  finely  cut 
cameo;  he  expands  it  into  a  mysterious  dream,  or  dramatizes 
it  in  a  little  story,  half  ballad,  half  idyl ;  and  in  all  these  forms 
his  art  is  so  perfect  that  we  never  have  a  sense  of  artificiality 
or  of  unsuccessful  effort;  but  all  seems  to  have  developed  itself 
by  the  same  beautiful  necessity  that  brings  forth  vine-leaves 
and  grapes  and  the  natural  curls  of  childhood.  Of  Heine's 
humorous  poetry  "Deutschland"  is  the  most  charming 
specimen — charming,  especially,  because  its  wit  and  humor 
grow  out  of  a  rich  loam  of  thought.  "  Atta  Troll"  is  more 
original,  more  various,  more  fantastic;  but  it  is  too  great  a 
strain  on  the  imagination  to  be  a  general  favorite.  We  have 
said  that  feehng  is  the  element  in  which  Heine's  poetic  genius 
habitually  floats,  but  he  can  occasionally  soar  to  a  higher 
region,  and  impart  deep  significance  to  picturesque  symbol- 
ism ;  he  can  flash  a  sublime  thought  over  the  past  and  into 
the  future ;  he  can  pour  forth  a  lofty  strain  of  hope  or  indig- 
nation. Few  could  forget,  after  once  hearing  them,  the  stan- 
zas at  the  close  of  "  Deutschland,"  in  which  he  warns  the  King 
of  Prussia  not  to  incur  the  irredeemable  hell  which  the  injured 
poet  can  create  for  him — the  singing  flames  of  a  Dante's 
terza  rima  / 


*  At  first  I  was  almost  in  despair,  and  I  thought  1  could  never  bear 
it,  and  yet  I  have  borne  it — only  do  not  ask  me  how  f 


82 


GERMAN  WIT: 


Kennst  du  die  Holle  des  Dante  nich 
Die  schrecklichen  Terzetten  ? 
Wen  da  der  Dichter  hineingesperrt 
Den  kann  kein  Gptt  mehr  retten. 
Kein  Gott,  kein  Heiland,  erlost  ihn  je 
Aus  diesen  singenden  flammen  ! 
Nimm  dich  in  Acht,  das  wir  dich  nicht 
Zu  solcher  Holle  verdammen."  ^ 

As  a  prosaist,  Heine  is,  in  one  point  of  view,  even  more 
distinguished  than  as  a  poet.  The  German  language  easily 
lends  itself  to  all  the  purposes  of  poetry;  like  the  ladies  of 
the  middle  ages,  it  is  gracious  and  compliant  to  the  Troub- 
adours. But  as  these  same  ladies  were  often  crusty  and 
repulsive  to  their  unmusical  mates,  so  the  German  language 
generally  appears  awkward  and  unmanageable  in  the  hands 
of  prose  writers.  Indeed  the  number  of  really  fine  German 
prosaists  before  Heine  would  hardly  have  exceeded  the  numer- 
ating powers  of  a  New  Hollander,  who  can  count  three  and 
no  more.  Persons  the  most  familiar  with  German  prose  tes- 
tify that  there  is  an  extra  fatigue  in  reading  it,  just  as  we  feel 
an  extra  fatigue  from  our  walk  when  it  takes  us  over  ploughed 
clay.  But  in  Heine's  hands  German  prose,  usually  so  heavy, 
so  clumsy,  so  dull,  becomes,  like  clay  in  the  hands  of  the 
chemist,  compact,  metallic,  brilliant ;  it  is  German  in  an  allo- 
tropic  condition. 

No  dreary,  labyrinthine  sentences  in  which  you  find  "no 
end  in  wandering  mazes  lost;"  no  chains  of  adjectives  in 
linked  harshness  long  drawn  out ;  no  digressions  thrown  in 
as  parentheses ;  but  crystalline  definiteness  and  clearness, 
fine  and  varied  rhythm,  and  all  that  delicate  precision,  all 
those  felicities  of  word  and  cadence,  which  belong  to  the 
highest  order  of  prose.  And  Heine  has  proved — what 
Madame  de  Stael  seems  to  have  doubted — that  it  is  possible 
to  be  witty  in  German  ;  indeed,  in  reading  him,  you  might 
imagine  that  German  was  preeminently  the  language  of 
wit,  so  flexible,  so  subtile,  so  piquant  does  it  become  under 

*  It  is  not  fair  to  the  English  reader  to  indulge  in  German  quotations, 
but  in  our  opinion  poetical  translations  are  usually  worse  than  valueless. 
For  those  who  think  differently,  however,  we  may  mention  that  Mr. 
Stores  Smith  has  pubhshed  a  modest  little  book,  containing  "  Selec- 
tionsfrom  the  poetry  of  Heinrich  Heine,"  and  that  a  meritorious  (Amer- 
ican) translation  of  Heine's  complete  works,  by  Charles  Leland,  is 
now  appearing  in  shilling  numbers. 


HEINRICH  HEINE. 


83 


his  management.  He  is  far  more  an  artist  in  prose  than 
Goethe.  He  has  not  the  breadth  and  repose,  and  the  calm 
development  which  belong  to  Goethe's  style,  for  they  are  for- 
eign to  his  mental  character ;  but  he  excels  Goethe  in  sus- 
ceptibility to  the  manifold  qualities  of  prose,  and  in  mastery 
over  its  effects.  Heine  is  full  of  variety,  of  light  and 
shadow  :  he  alternates  between  epigrammatic  pith,  imagina- 
tive grace,  sly  allusion,  and  daring  piquancy ;  and  athwart 
all  these  there  runs  a  vein  of  sadness,  tenderness,  and  gran- 
deur which  reveals  the  poet.  He  continually  throws  out 
those  finely  chiselled  sayings  which  stamp  themselves  on  the 
memory,  and  become  familiar  by  quotation.  For  example  : 
«'  The  People  have  time  enough,  they  are  immortal  ;  kings 
only  are  mortal."  "Wherever  a  great  soul  utters  its 
thoughts,  there  is  Golgotha."  Nature  wanted  to  see  how 
she  looked,  and  she  created  Goethe."  "Only  the  man  who 
has  known  bodily  suffering  is  truly  a  man;  his  limbs  have 
their  Passion-history,  they  are  spiritualized."  He  calls 
Rubens  "  this  Flemish  Titan,  the  wings  of  whose  genius  were 
so  strong  that  he  soared  as  high  as  the  sun,  in  spite  of  the 
hundred-weight  of  Dutch  cheeses  that  hung  on  his  legs." 
Speaking  of  Borne's  dislike  to  the  calm  creations  of  the  true 
artist,  he  says,  "  He  was  like  a  child  which,  insensible  to  the 
glowing  significance  of  a  Greek  statue,  only  touches  the 
marble  and  complains  of  cold." 

The  most  poetic  and  specifically  humorous  of  Heine's 
prose  writings  are  the  "  Reisebilder."  The  comparison  with 
Sterne  is  inevitable  here ;  but  Heine  does  not  suffer  from  it, 
for  if  he  falls  below  Sterne  in  raciness  of  humor,  he  is  far 
above  him  in  poetic  sensibiHty  and  in  reach  and  variety  of 
thought.  Heine's  humor  is  never  persistent,  it  never  flows 
on  long  in  easy  gayety  and  drollery  ;  where  it  is  not  swelled 
by  the  tide  of  poetic  feeling,  it  is  continually  dashing  down 
the  precipice  of  a  witticism.  It  is  not  broad  and  unctuous  ; 
it  is  aerial  and  sprite-like,  a  momentary  resting-place  between 
his  poetry  and  his  wit.  In  the  "Reisebilder"  he  runs 
through  the  whole  gamut  of  his  powers,  and  gives  us  every 
hue  of  thought,  from  the  wildly  droll  and  fantastic  to  the 
sombre  and  the  terrible.  Here  is  a  passage  almost  Dant- 
esque  in  its  conception  : 

"Alas!  one  ought  in  truth  to  write  against  no  one  in  this  world. 
Each  of  us  is  sick  enough  in  this  great  lazaretto,  and  niany  a  polemi- 


84 


GERMAN  WIT: 


cal  writing  reminds  me  involuntarily  of  a  revolting  quarrel,  in  a  little 
hospital  at  Cracow,  of  which  I  chanced  to  be  a  witness,  and  where  it 
was  horrible  to  hear  how  the  patients  mockingly  reproached  each 
other  with  their  infirmities :  how  one  who  was  wasted  by  consumption 
jeered  at  another  who  was  bloated  by  dropsy  ;  how  one  laughed  at 
another's  cancer  in  the  nose,  and  this  one  again  at  his  neighbor's 
locked-jaw  or  squint,  until  at  last  the  delirious  fever-patient  sprang  out 
of  bed  and  tore  away  the  coverings  from  the  wounded  bodies  of  his 
companions,  and  nothing  was  to  be  seen  but  hideous  misery  and 
mutilation." 

And  how  fine  is  the  transition  in  the  very  next  chapter, 
where,  after  quoting  the  Homeric  description  of  the  feasting 
gods,  he  says : 

"  Then  suddenly  approached,  panting,  a  pale  Jew,  with  drops  of 
blood  on  his  brow,  with  a  crown  of  thorns  on  his  head,  and  a  great 
cross  laid  on  his  shoulders  ;  and  he  threw  the  cross  on  the  high  table 
of  the  gods,  so  that  the  golden  cups  tottered,  and  the  gods  became 
dumb  and  pale,  and  grew  even  paler,  till  they  at  last  melted  away 
into  vapor." 

The  richest  specimens  of  Heine's  wit  are  perhaps  to  be 
found  in  the  works  which  have  appeared  since  the  "  Reise- 
bilder."  The  years,  if  they  have  intensified  his  satirical  bitter- 
ness, have  also  given  his  wit  a  finer  edge  and  poHsh.  His 
sarcasms  are  so  subtilely  prepared  and  so  slyly  allusive,  that 
they  may  often  escape  readers  whose  sense  of  wit  is  not  very 
acute ;  but  for  those  who  delight  in  the  subtile  and  delicate 
flavors  of  style,  there  can  hardly  be  any  wit  more  irresistible  • 
than  Heine's.  We  may  measure  its  force  by  the  degree  in 
which  it  has  subdued  the  German  language  to  its  purposes, 
and  made  that  language  brilliant  in  spite  of  a  long  heredi- 
tary transmission  of  dullness.  As  one  of  the  most  harmless 
examples  of  his  satire,  take  this  on  a  man  who  has  certainly 
had  his  share  of  adulation : 

"Assuredly  it  is  far  from  my  purpose  to  depreciate  M.  Victor 
Cousin.  The  titles  of  this  celebrated  philosopher  even  lay  me  under 
an  obligation  to  praise  him.  He  belongs  to  that  Uving  pantheon  of 
France  which  we  call  the  peerage,  and  his  intelligent  legs  rest  on  the 
velvet  benches  of  the  Luxembourg.  I  must  indeed  sternly  repress  all 
private  feelings  which  might  seduce  me  into  an  excessive  enthusiasm. 
Otherwise  I  might  be  suspected  of  servility  ;  for  M.  Cousin  is  very 
influential  in  the  state  by  means  of  his  position  and  his  tongue.  This 
consideration  might  even  move  me  to  speak  of  his  faults  as  frankly 
as  of  his  virtues.  Will  he  himself  disapprove  of  this?  Assuredly  not. 
I  know  that  we  cannot  do  higher  honor  to  great  minds  than  when  we 


HRINRICH  HEINE. 


throw  as  strong  a  liglit  on  their  (Icmorits  as  on  their  merits.    When  we 
sing  the  praises  of  a  Hercules,  we  must  also  mention  that  he  once  laid 
aside  the  lion's  skin  and  sat  down  to  the  distaff :  what  then  ?  he  remains 
notwithstanding  a  Hercules  !    So  when  we  relate  similar  circumstances 
concerning  M.  Cousm.  we  nuisi  nevertheless  add,  with  discriminating 
eulogy  :  M.  Cousin,  if  he  Ijns  so)iii'ti)ncs  sat  twaddlin^^  at  the  distaff, 
has  never  laid  aside' the  lion  s  skin.  ...  It  is  true  that,  having  been 
suspected  of  demagogy,  he  spent  some  time  in  a  German  prison,  just 
as  Lafayette  and  Richard  Coeur  de  Lion.    But  that  M.  Cousin  there 
In  his  leisure  hours  studied  Kant's  'Critique  of  Pure  Reason'  is  to  be 
doubted  on  three  grounds:    First,  this  book  is  written  in  German. 
Secondly,  in  order  to  read  this  book,  a  man  must  understand  German. 
Thirdly,  M.  Cousin  does  not  understand  German.  ...  I  fear  I  am 
passing  unawares  from  the  sweet  waters  of  praise  into  the  bitter  ocean 
of  blame".    Yes,  on  one  account  I  cannot  refrain  from  bitterly  blaming 
M.  Cousin;  namely,  that  he  who  loves  truth  far  more  than  he  loves 
Plato  and  Tenneman,  is  unjust  to  himself  when  he  wants  to  persuade 
us  that  he  has  borrowed  something  from  the  philosophy  of  Schelling 
and  Hegel.    Against  this  self-accusa.tion,  I  must  take  M.  Cousin  under 
my  protection.    On  my  word  and  conscience  !  this  honorable  man 
has  not  stolen  a  jot  from  Schelling  and  Hegel,  and  if  he  brought  home 
anything  of  theirs,  it  was  merely  their  friendship.    That  does  honor 
to  his  heart.    But  there  are  many  instances  of  such  self-accusation  in 
psychology.    I  knew^  a  man  who  declared  that  he  had  stolen  sih  er 
spoons  at  the  king's  table  ;  and  yet  we  all  knew  that  the  poor  de\  il 
had  never  been  presented  at  court,  and  accused  himself  of  stealin;^ 
these  spoons  to  make  us  believe  that  he  had  been  a  guest  at  the  palace. 
No!   In  German  philosophy  M.  Cousin  has  always  kept  the  sixth 
commandment ;  here  he  has  never  pocketed  a  single  idea,  not  so 
much  as  a  salt-spoon  of  an  idea.    All  witnesses  agree  i-n  attesting 
that  Hn  this  respect  M.  Cousin  is  honor  itself.  ...  I  prophesy  to 
you  that  the  renown  of  M.  Cousin,  like  the  French  Revolution,  will 
go  round  the  world !    I  hear  some  one  wickedly  add :  Undeniably 
the  renown  of  M.  Cousin  is  going  round  the  world,  and  it  has  already 
taken  its  departure  from  France.'' 

The  following  ''symbolical  myth"  about  Louis  Philippe 
is  very  characteristic  of  Heine's  manner: 

"  1  remember  very  well  that  immediately  on  my  arrival  (in  Paris) 
I  hastened  to  the  Palais  Royal  to  see  Louis  Phihppe.  The  friend  who 
conducted  me  told  me  that  the  king  now  appeared  on  the  terrace  only 
at  stated  hours,  but  that  formerly  he  was  to  be  seen  at  any  time  for 
five  francs.  '  For  five  francs!  '  I  cried,  with  amazement;  'does  he 
then  show  himself  for  money?'  No  ;  but  he  is  shown  for  money,  and 
it  happens  in  this  way  :  There  is  a  society  of  claqueurs,  ?narchands 
m  de  contre-marques,  and  such  riff-raff,  who  offered  every  foreigner  to 
show  him  the  king  for  five  francs :  if  he  would  give  ten  francs,  he 
might  see  the  king  raise  his  eyes  to  heaven,  and  lay  his  hand  protest 
ingly  on  his  heart ;  if  he  would  give  twenty  francs,  the  king  would 
sing  the  Marseillaise.  If  the  foreigner  gave  five  francs,  they  raised  a 
loud  cheering  under  the  king's  windows,  and  his  majesty  appeared  on 


86 


EVANGELICAL  TEACHING: 


the  terrace,  bowed,  and  retired.  If  ten  francs,  they  shouted  still 
louder,  and  gesticulated  as  if  they  had  been  possessed,  when  the  king 
appeared,  who  then,  as  a  sign  of  silent  emotion,  raised  his  eyes  to 
heaven,  and  laid  his  hand  on  his  heart.  English  visitors,  however, 
would  sometimes  spend  as  much  as  twenty  francs,  and  then  the  enthu- 
siasm mounted  to  the  highest  pitch  ;  no  sooner  did  the  king  appear  on 
the  terrace,  than  the  Marseillaise  was  strtick  up  and  roared  out  fright- 
fully, until  Louis  Phihppe,  perhaps  only  for  the  sake  of  putting  an  end 
to  the  singing,  bowed,  laid  his  hand  on  his  heart,  and  joined  in  the 
Marseillaise.  Whether,  as  is  asserted,  he  beat  time  with  his  foot.  I 
cannot  say." 


EVANGELICAL  TEACHING:  DR.  GUMMING. 


Given,  a  man  with  moderate  intellect,  a  moral  standard 
not  higher  than  the  average,  some  rhetorical  affluence  and 
great  glibness  of  speech,  what  is  the  career  in  which,  without 
the  aid  of  birth  or  money,  he  may  most  easily  attain  power 
and  reputation  in  English  society?  Where  is  that  Goshen  of 
mediocrity  in  which  a  smattering  of  science  and  learning  will 
pass  for  profound  instruction,  where  platitudes  will  be  accepted 
as  wisdom,  bigoted  narrowness  as  holy  zeal^  unctuous  egoism 
as  God-given  piety?  Let  such  a  man  become  an  evangelical 
preacher;  he  will  then  find  it  possible  to  reconcile  small  ability 
with  great  ambition,  superficial  knowledge  with  the  prestige 
of  erudition,  a  middling  morale  with  a  high  reputation  for 
sanctity.  Let  him  shun  practical  extremes  and  be  ultra  only 
in  what  is  purely  theoretic ;  let  him  be  stringent  on  predestin- 
ation, but  latitudinarian  on  fasting;  unflinching  in  insisting 
on  the  eternity  of  punishment,  but  diffident  of  curtailing  the 
substantial  comforts  of  time ;  ardent  and  imaginative  on  the 
pre -millennial  advent  of  Christ,  but  cold  and  cautious  towards 
every  other  infringement  of  the  status  quo.  Let  him  fish  for 
souls  not  with  the  bait  of  inconvenient  singularity,  but  with 
the  drag-net  of  comfortable  conformity.  Let  him  be  hard 
and  literal  in  his  interpretation  only  when  he  wants  to  hurl 
texts  at  the  heads  of  unbelievers  and  adversaries,  but  when 
the  letter  of  the  Scriptures  presses  too  closely  on  the  genteel 


DR.  GUMMING. 


87 


Christianity  of  the  nineteenth  century,  let  him  use  his  spirit- 
ualizing alembic  and  disperse  it  into  impalpable  ether.  Let 
him  preach  less  of*Christ  than  of  Antichrist ;  let  him  be  less 
definite  in  showing  what  sin  is  than  in  showing  who  is  the 
Man  of  Sin,  less  expansive  on  the  blessedness  of  faith  than 
on  the  accursedness  of  infidelity.  Above  all,  let  him  set  up 
as  an  interpreter  of  prophecy,  and  rival  "  Moore's  Almanack" 
in  the  prediction  of  political  events,  tickling  the  interest  of 
hearers  who  are  but  moderately  spiritual  by  showing  how 
the  Holy  Spirit  has  dictated  problems  and  charades  for  their 
benefit,  and  how»  if  they  are  ingenious  enough  to  solve  these, 
they  may  have  their  Christian  graces  nourished  by  learning 
precisely  to  whom  they  may  point  as  the  "horn  that  had 
eyes,"  "the  lying  prophet,"  and  the  "unclean  spirits."  In 
this  way  he  will  draw  men  to  him  by  the  strong  cords  of  their 
passions,  made  reason-proof  by  being  baptized  with  the  name 
of  piety.  In  this  way  he  may  gain  a  metropolitan  pulpit;  the 
avenues  to  his  church  will  be  as  crowded  as  the  passages  to 
the  opera;  he  has  but  to  print  his  prophetic  sermons  and  bind 
them  in  lilac  and  gold,  and  they  will  adorn  the  drawing-room 
table  of  all  evangelical  ladies,  who  will  regard  as  a  sort  of 
pious  "light  reading"  the  demonstration  that  the  prophecy 
of  the  locusts  whose  sting  is  in  their  tail,  is  fulfilled  in  the  fact 
of  the  Turkish  commander's  having  taken  a  horse's  tail  for 
his  standard,  and,  that  the  French  are  the  very  frogs  pre- 
dicted in  the  Revelation. 

Pleasant  to  the  clerical  flesh  under  such  circumstances  is 
the  arrival  of  Sunday !  Somewhat  at  a  disadvantage  during 
the  week,  in  the  presence  of  working-day  interests  and  lay 
splendors,  on  Sunday  the  preacher  becomes  the  cynosure  of 
a  thousand  eyes,  and  predominates  at  once  over  the  Amphi- 
tryon with  whom  he  dines,  and  the  most  captious  member 
of  his  church  or  vestry.  He  has  an  immense  advantage 
over  all  other  public  speakers.  The  platform  orator  is  sub- 
ject to  the  criticism  of  hisses  and  groans.  Counsel  for  the 
plaintiff  expects  tUe  retort  of  counsel  for  the  defendant.  The 
honorable  gentleman  on  one  side  of  the  House  is  liable  to 
have  his  facts  and  figures  shown  up  by  his  honorable  friend 
on  the  opposite  side.  Even  the  scientific  or  literary  lecturer, 
if  he  is  dull  or  incompetent,  may  see  the  best  part  of  his 
audience  slip  quietly  out  one  by  one.  But  the  preacher  is 
completely  master  of  the  situation :  no  one  may  hiss,  no  one 


88 


EVANGELICAL  TEACHING 


may  depart.  Like  the  writer  of  imaginary  conversations,  he 
may  put  what  imbecilities  he  pleases  into  the  mouths  of  his 
antagonists,  and  swell  with  triumph  when  he  has  refuted 
them.  He  may  riot  in  gratuitous  assertions,  confident  that 
no  man  will  contradict  him ;  he  may  exercise  perfect  free- 
will in  logic,  and  invent  illustrative  experience;  he  may  give 
an  evangelical  edition  of  history  with  the  inconvenient  facts 
omitted — all  this  he  may  do  with  impunity,  certain  that  those 
of  his  hearers  who  are  not  sympathizing  are  not  listening. 
For  the  Press  has  no  band  of  critics  who  go  the  round  of  the 
churches  and  chapels,  and  are  on  the  watch  for  a  slip  or 
defect  in  the  preacher  to  make  a  "  feature"  in  their  article :  the 
clergy  are,  practically,  the  most  irresponsible  of  all  talkers. 
For  this  reason,  at  least,  it  is  well  that  they  do  not  always 
allow  their  discourses  to  be  merely  fugitive,  but  are  often 
induced  to  fix  them  in  that  black  and  white  in  which  they 
are  open  to  the  criticism  of  any  man  who  has  the  courage 
and  patience  to  treat  them  with  thorough  freedom  of  speech 
and  pen. 

It  is  because  we  think  this  criticism  of  clerical  teaching 
desirable  for  the  public  good  that  we  devote  some  pages  to 
Dr.  Gumming.  He  is,  as  every  one  knows,  a  preacher  of 
immense  popularity,  and  of  the  numerous  publications  in  which 
he  perpetuates  his  pulpit  labors,  all  circulate  widely,  and  some, 
according  to  their  title-page,  have  reached  the  sixteenth  thou- 
sand. Now  our  opinion  of  these  publications  is  the  very 
opposite  of  that  given  by  a  newspaper  eulogist :  we  do  not 
"believe  that  the  repeated  issues  of  Dr.  Cumming's  thoughts 
are  having  a  beneficial  effect  on  society,"  but  the  reverse  ; 
and  hence,  little  inclined  as  we  are  to  dwell  on  his  pages,  we 
think  it  worth  while  to  do  so,  for  the  sake  of  pointing  out  in 
them  what  we  believe  to  be  profoundly  mistaken  and  perni- 
cious. Of  Dr.  Gumming  personally  we  know  absolutely 
nothing:  our  acquaintance  with  him  is  confined  to  a  p.rusal 
of  his  works,  our  judgment  of  him  is  founded  solely  on  the 
manner  in  which  he  has  writteu  himself  down  on  his  pages. 
We  know  neither  how  he  looks  nor  how  he  lives.  We  are 
ignorant  whether,  like  St.  Paul,  he  has  a  bodily  presence  that 
is  weak  and  contemptible,  or  whether  his  person  is  as  florid 
and  as  prone  to  amplification  as  his  style.  For  aught  we 
know,  he  may  not  only  have  the  gift  of  prophecy,  but  may 
bestow  the  profits  of  all  his  works  to  feed  the  poor,  and  be 


DR.  GUMMING. 


89 


ready  to  give  his  own  body  to  be  burned  with  as  much  alac- 
rity as  he  infers  the  everlasting  burning  of  Roman  Catholics 
and  Puseyites.  %Out  of  the  pulpit  he  may  be  a  model  of  jus- 
tice, truthfulness,  and  the  love  that  thinketh  no  evil;  but  we 
are  obliged  to  judge  of  his  charity  by  the  spirit  we  find  in 
his  sermons,  and  shall  only  be  glad  to  learn  that  his  practice 
is,  in  many  respects,  an  amiable  non  sequitur  from  his  teach- 
ing- 

Dr.  Cumming's  mind  is  evidently  not  of  the  pietistic  order. 
There  is  not  the  slightest  leaning  towards  mysticism  in  his 
Christianity — no  indication  of  religious  raptures,  of  delight 
in  God,  of  spiritual  communion  with  the  Father.  He  is 
most  at  home  in  the  forensic  view  of  Justification,  and  dwells 
on  salvation  as  a  scheme  rather  than  as  an  experience.  He 
insists  on  good  works  as  a  sign  of  justifying  faith,  as  labors 
to  be  achieved  to  the  glory  of  God,  but  he  rarely  represents 
them  as  the  spontaneous,  necessary  outflow  of  a  soul  filled 
with  divine  love.  He  is  at  home  in  the  external,  the  polemi- 
cal, the  historical,  the  circumstantial,  and  is  only  episodically 
devout  and  practical.  The  great  majority  of  his  published 
sermons  are  occupied  with  argument  or  philippic  against 
Romanists  and  unbelievers,  with  "  vindications  "  of  the  Bible, 
with  the  political  interpretation  of  prophecy,  or  the  criticism 
of  public  events;  and  the  devout  aspiration,  or  the  spiritual 
and  practical  exhortation,  is  tacked  to  them  as  a  sort  of  fringe 
in  a  hurried  sentence  or  two  at  the  end.  He  revels  in  the 
demonstration  that  the  Pope  is  the  Man  of  Sin;  he  is  copi- 
ous on  the  downfall  of  the  Ottoman  empire ;  he  appears  to 
glow  with  satisfaction  in  turning  a  story  which  tends  to  show 
how  he  abashed  an  "infidel;"  it  is  a  favorite  exercise  with 
him  to  form  conjectures  of  the  process  by  which  the  earth  is 
to  be  burned  up,  to  picture  Dr.  Chalmers  and  Mr.  Wilberforce 
being  caught  up  to  meet  Christ  in  the  air,  while  Romanists, 
Puseyites,  and  infidels  are  given  over  to  gnashing  of  teeth. 
But  of  really  spiritual  joys  and  sorrows,  of  the  life  and  death 
of  Christ  as  a  manifestation  of  love  that  constrains  the  soul, 
of  sympathy  with  that  yearning  over  the  lost  and  erring 
which  made  Jesus  weep  over  Jerusalem,  and  prompted  the 
sublime  prayer,  "  Feather,  forgive  them,"  of  the  gentler  fruits 
of  the  Spirit,  and  the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  understand- 
ing— of  all  this  we  find  little  trace  in  Dr.  Cumming's  discourses. 

His  style  is  in  perfect  correspondence  with  this  habit  ot 


90 


EVANGELICAL  TEACHLNG  : 


mind.  Though  diffuse,  as  that  of  all  preachers  must  be,  it 
has  rapidity  of  movement,  perfect  clearness,  and  some  apt- 
ness of  illustration.  He  has  much  of  th^t  literary  talent 
which  makes  a  good  journalist — the  power  of  beating  out 
an  idea  over  a  large  space,  and  of  introducing  far-fetched  a 
propos.  His  writings  have,  indeed,  no  high  merit :  they  have 
no  originality  or  force  of  thought,  no  striking  felicity  of 
presentation,  no  depth  of  emotion.  Throughout  nine  vol- 
umes we  have  alighted  on  no  passage  which  impressed  us  as 
worth  extracting  and  placing  among  the  ''beauties''  of  evan- 
gelical writers,  such  as  Robert  Hall,  Foster  the  Essayist,  or 
Isaac  Taylor.  Everywhere  there  is  common-place  clever- 
ness, nowhere  a  spark  of  rare  thought,  of  lofty  sentiment,  or 
pathetic  tenderness.  We  feel  ourselves  in  company  with  a 
voluble  retail  talker,  whose  language  is  exuberant  but  not 
exact,  and  to  whom  we  should  never  think  of  referring  for 
precise  information,  or  for  well-digested  thought  and  exper- 
ience. His  argument  continually  slides  into  wholesale  asser- 
tion and  vague  declamation,  and  in  his  love  of  ornament  he 
frequently  becomes  tawdry.  For  example,  he  tells  us  Apoc. 
Sketches,"  p.  265)  that  "  Botany  weaves  around  the  cross 
her  amaranthine  garlands;  and  Newton  comes  from  his  starry 
home,  Linnaeus  from  his  flowery  resting  place,  and  Werner 
and  Hutton  from  their  subterranean  graves  at  the  voice  of 
Chalmers,  to  acknowledge  that  all  they  learned  and  elicited 
in  their  respective  provinces  has  only  served  to  show  more 
clearly  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  enthroned  on  the  riches  of 
the  universe."  And  so  prosaic  an  injunction  to  his  hearers 
as  that  they  should  choose  a  residence  within  an  easy  dis- 
tance of  church,  is  magnificently  draped  by  him  as  an  exhor- 
tation to  perfer  a  house  ''that  basks  in  the  sunshine  of  the 
countenance  of  God."  Like  all  preachers  of  his  class,  he  is 
more  fertile  in  imaginative  paraphrase  than  in  close  exposi- 
tion, and  in  this  way  he  gives  us  some  remarkable  fragments 
of  what  we  may  call  the  romance  of  Scripture,  filling  up  the 
outline  of  the  record  with  an  elaborate  coloring  quite 
undreamed  of  by  more  literal  minds.  The  serpent,  he  informs 
us,  said  to  Eve,  "Can  it  be  so?  Surely  you  are  mistaken, 
that  God  hath  said  you  shall  die,  a. creature  so  fair,  so  lovely, 
so  beautiful.  It  is  impossible.  The  lazvs  of  nature  and  phy- 
sical science  tell  you  that  my  interpretation  is  correct^  you 
shall  not  die.    I  can  tell  you  by  my  own  experience  as  an 


DR.  GUMMING. 


91 


angel  that  you  shall  be  as  gods,  knowing  good  and  evil" 
(•*  Apoc.  Sketches,"  p.  294).  Again,  according  to  Dr.  Gum- 
ming, Abel  had  so  clear  an  idea  of  the  Incarnation  and 
Atonement  that  when  he  offered  his  sacrifice  *'he  must  have 
said,  *  I  feel  myself  a  guilty  sinner,  and  that  in  myself  I  can- 
not meet  Thee  alive;  I  lay  on  Thine  altar  this  victim,  and  I 
shed  its  blood  as  my  testimony  that  mine  should  be  shed ; 
and  1  look  for  forgiveness  and  undeserved  mercy  through 
Him  who  is  to  bruise  the  serpent's  head,  and  whose  atone- 
ment this  typifies '  "  Occas.  Disc,"  vol.  i.  p.  23).  Indeed, 
his  productions  are  essentially  ephemeral ;  he  is  essentially  a 
journalist,  who  writes  sermons  instead  of  leading  articles  ; 
who,  instead  of  venting  diatribes  against  her  majesty's  min- 
isters, directs  his  power  of  invective  against  Cardinal  Wise- 
man and  the  Puseyites  ;  instead  of  declaiming  on  public  spirit, 
perorates  on  the  glory  of  God."  We  fancy  he  is  called,  in 
the  more  refined  evangelical  circles,  an  intellectual  preacher ; " 
by  the  plainer  sort  of  Ghristians,  a  "  flowery  preacher ;  "  and 
we  are  inclined  to  think  that  the  more  spiritually  minded 
class  of  believers,  who  look  with  greater  anxiety  for  the  king- 
dom of  God  within  them  than  for  the  visible  advent  of  Christ 
in  1864,  will  be  likely  to  find  Dr.  Cumming's  declamatory 
flights  and  historico-prophetical  exercitations  as  little  better 
than  ''clout's  o'  cauld  parritch." 

Such  is  our  general  impression  from  his  writings  after  an 
attentive  perusal.  There  are  some  particular  characteristics 
which  we  shall  consider  more  closely,  but  in  doing  so  we 
must  be  understood  as  altogether  declining  any  doctrinal 
discussion.  We  have  no  intention  to  consider  the  grounds 
of  Dr.  Cumming's  dogmatic  system,  to  examine  the  princi- 
ples of  his  prophetic  exegesis,  or  to  question  his  opinion 
concerning  the  little  horn,  the  river  Euphrates,  or  the  scx^en 
vials.  We  identify  ourselves  with  no  one  of  the  bodies 
whom  he  regards  it  as  his  special  mission  to  attack :  not 
giving  adhesion  either  to  Romanism,  to  Puseyism,  or  to  that 
anomalous  combination  of  opinions  which  he  introduces  to 
us  under  the  name  of  infidelity.  It  is  simply  as  spectators 
that  we  criticise  Dr.  Cumming's  mode  of  warfare :  as  specta- 
tors concerned  less  with  what  he  holds  to  be  Christian  truth 
than  with  his  manner  of  enforcing  that  truth;  less  with  the 
doctrines  he  teaches  than  with  the  moral  spirit  and  tenden- 
cies of  his  teaching.  - 


92 


EVANGELICAL  TEACHING: 


One  of  the  most  striking  characteristics  of  Dr.  Cumming's 
writings  is  itnscrupulosity  of  statement.  His  motto  appar- 
ently is,  Christianitatemy  quocunqiie  modo,  Christianitatem ; 
and  the  only  system  he  includes  undeu  the  term  Christianity 
is  Calvinistic  Protestantism.  Experience  has  so  long  shown 
that  the  human  brain  is  a  congenial  nidus  for  inconsistent 
behefs,  that  we  do  not  pause  to  inquire  how  Dr.  Gumming, 
who  attributes  the  conversion  of  the  unbelieving  to  the 
Divine  Spirit,  can  think  it  necessary  to  cooperate  with  that 
Spirit  by  argumentative  white  lies.  Nor  do  we  for  a 
moment  impugn  the  genuineness  of  his  zeal  for  Christianity, 
or  the  sincerity  of  his  conviction  that  the  doctrines  he 
preaches  are  necessary  to  salvation ;  on  the  contrary,  we 
regard  the  flagrant  unveracity  found  on  his  pages  as  an  indi- 
rect result  of  that  conviction — as  a  result,  namely,  of  the  intel- 
lectual and  moral  distortion  of  view  which  is  inevitably  pro- 
duced by  assigning  to  dogmas,  based  on  a  very  complex 
structure  of  evidence,  the  place  and  authority  of  first  truths. 
A  distinct  appreciation  of  the  value  of  evidence — in  other 
words,  the  intellectual  perception  of  truth — is  more  closely 
allied  to  truthfulness  of  statement,  or  the  moral  quality  of 
veracity,  than  is  generally  admitted.  That  highest  moral 
habit,  the  constant  preference  of  truth,  both  theoretically 
and  practically,  preeminently  demands  the  cooperation  of 
the  intellect  with  the  impulses — as  is  indicated  by  the  fact 
that  it  is  only  found  in  anything  like  completeness  in  the 
highest  class  of  minds.  And  it  is  commonly  seen  that,  in 
proportion  as  religious  sects  believe  themselves  to  be  guided 
by  direct  inspiration  rather  than  by  a  spontaneous  exertion 
of  their  faculties,  their  sense  of  truthfulness  is  misty  and  con- 
fused. No  one  can  have  talked  to  the  more  enthusiastic 
Methodists  and  listened  to  their  stories  of  miracles,  without 
perceiving  that  they  require  no  other  passport  to  a  statement 
than  that  it  accords  with  their  wishes  and  their  general  con- 
ception of  God's  dealings ;  nay,  they  regard  as  a  symptom  of 
sinful  scepticism  an  inquiry  into  the  evidence  for  a  story 
which  they  think  unquestionably  tends  to  the  glory  of  God, 
and  in  retailing  such  stories,  new  particulars,  further  tending 
to  his  glory,  are  ''borne  in"  upon  their  minds.  Now,  Dr. 
Gumming,  as  we  have  said,  is  no  enthusiastic  pietist:  within 
a  certain  circle — within  the  mill  of  evangelical  orthodoxy — 
his  intellect  is  perpetually  at  work ;  but  that  principle  of  sop- 


DR.  CUMMTNG. 


93 


histication  which  our  friends  the  Methodists  derive  from  the 
predominance  of  their  pietistic  feelings,  is  invoh'cd  for  him  in 
the  doctrine  of  verbal  inspiration;  what  is  for  them  a  state 
of  emotion  submerging  the  intellect,  is  with  him  a  formula 
imprisoning  the  intellect,  depriving  it  of  its  proper  function 
— the  free  search  for  truth — and  making  it  the  mere  servant- 
of-all-work  to  a  foregone  conclusion.  Minds  fettered  by  this 
doctrine  no  longer  inquire  concerning  a  proposition  whether 
it  is  attested  by  sufficient  evidence,  but  whether  it  accords 
with  Scripture;  they  do  not  search  for  facts,  as  such,  but  for 
facts  that  will  bear  out  their  doctrine.  They  become  accus- 
tomed to  reject  the  more  direct  evidence  in  favor  of  the  less 
direct,  and  where  adverse  evidence  reaches  demonstration 
they  must  resort  to  devices  and  expedients  in  order  to 
explain  away  contradiction.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  this  men- 
tal habit  blunts  not  only  the  perception  of  truth,  but  the 
sense  of  truthfulness,  and  that  the  man  whose  faith  drives 
him  into  fallacies  treads  close  upon  the  precipice  of  false- 
hood. 

We  have  entered  into  this  digression  for  the  sake  of  miti- 
gating the  inference  that  is  likely  to  be  drawn  from  that  char- 
acteristic of  Dr.  Cumming's  works  to  which  we  have  pointed. 
He  is  much  in  the  same  intellectual  condition  as  that  pro- 
fessor of  Padua,  who,  in  order  to  disprove  Galileo's  discovery 
of  Jupiter's  satellites,  urged  that  as  there  were  only  se\  en 
metals  there  could  not  be  more  than  seven  planets — a  men- 
tal condition  scarcely  compatible  with  candor.  And  we  may 
well  suppose  that  if  the  professor  had  held  the  belief  in  se\'en 
planets,  and  no  more,  to  be  a  necessary  condition  of  salva- 
tion, his  mental  vision  would  have  been  so  dazed  that  e\'en 
if  he  had  consented  to  look  through  Galileo's  telescope,  his 
eyes  would  have  reported  in  accordance  with  his  inward 
alarms  rather  than  with  the  external  fact.  So  long  as  a  belief 
in  propositions  is  regarded  as  indispensable  to  salvation,  the 
pursuit  of  truth  as  such  is  not  possible,  any  more  than  it  is 
possible  for  a  man  who  is  swimming  for  his  life  to  make 
meteorological  observations  on  the  storm  which  threatens  to 
overwhelm  him.  The  sense  of  alarm  and  haste,  the  anxiety 
for  personal  safety,  which  Dr.  Gumming  insists  upon  as  the 
proper  religious  attitude,  unmans  the  nature,  and  allows  no 
thorough,  calm  thinking,  n6  truly  noble,  disinterested  feeling. 
Hence,  we  by  no  means  suspect  that  the  unscrupulosity  ot 


94 


EVANGELICAL  TEACHING: 


statement  with  which  we  charge  Di".  Gumming  extends 
beyond  the  sphere  of  his  theological  prejudices  ;  reHgion 
apart,  he  probably  appreciates  and  practises  veracity. 

A  grave  general  accusation  must  be  supported  by  details, 
and  in  adducing  these,  we  purposely  select  the  most  obvious 
cases  of  misrepresentation — such  as  require  no  argument  to 
expose  them,  but  can  be  perceived  at  a  glance.  Among  Dr. 
Cumming's  numerous  books,  one  of  the  most  notable  for 
unscrupulosity  of  statement  is  the  "Manual  of  Christian  Evi- 
dences," written,  as  he  tells  us  in  his  Preface,  not  to  give  the 
deepest  solutions  of  the  difficulties  in  question,  but  to  fur- 
nish Scripture-readers,  city  missionaries,  and  Sunday-school 
teachers  with  a  '^ready  reply"  to  sceptical  arguments.  This 
announcement  that  readiness  was  the  chief  quality  sought  for 
in  the  solutions  here  given,  modifies  our  inference  from  the 
other  qualities  which  those  solutions  present;  and  it  is  but 
fair  to  presume,  that  when  the  Christian  disputant  is  not  in  a 
hurry,  Dr.  Cumming  would  recommicnd  replies  less  ready 
and  more  veracious.  Here  is  an  example  of  what  in  another 
place*  he  tells  his  readers  is  "change  in  their  pocket,  ...  a 
little  ready  argument  which  they  can  employ,  and  therewith 
answer  a  fool  according  to  his  folly."  From  the  nature  of 
this  argumentative  small-coin,  we  are  inclined  to  think  Dr. 
Cumming  understands  answering  a  fool  according  to  his  folly 
to  mean,  giving  him  a  foolish  answer.  We  quote  from  the 
"Manual  of  Christian  Evidences,"  p.  62: 

"Some  of  the  gods  which  the  heathen  worshipped  were  among  the 
greatest  monsters  that  ever  walked  the  earth.  Mercury  was  a  thief ; 
and  because  he  was  an  expert  thief  he  was  enrolled  among  the  gods, 
liacchus  was  a  mere  sensualist  and  drunkard ;  and  therefore  he  was 
enrolled  among  the  gods.  Venus  was  a  dissipated  and  abandoned 
courtesan ;  and  therefore  she  was  enrolled  among  the  goddesses. 
Mars  was  a  savage,  that  gloried  in  battle  and  in  blood  ;  and  therefore 
he  was  deified  and  enrolled  among  the  gods." 

Does  Dr.  Cumming  beheve  the  purport  of  these  sentences  ? 
If  so,  this  passage  is  worth  handing  down  as  his  theory  of 
the  Greek  myth — as  a  specimen  of  the  astounding  ignorance 
which  was  possible  in  a  metropolitan  preacher  a.  d.  1854. 
*■  And  if  he  does  not  believe  them.  .  .  .  The  inference  must 
then  be,  that  he  thinks  delicate  veracity  about  the  ancient 
Greeks  is  not  a  Christian  virtue,  but  only  a  "splendid  sin" 


*"Lect.  on  Daniel,"  p.  6. 


DR.  CUMMING. 


95 


of  the  unregenerate.  This  inference  is  rendered  the  more 
probable  by  our  finding,  a  little  further  on,  that  he  is  not 
more  scrupulous  about  the  moderns,  if  they  come  under  his 
difinition  of  "  Infidels."  But  the  passage  we  are  about  to 
quote  in  proof  of  this  has  a  worse  quality  than  its  discrepancy 
with  fact.  Who  that  has  a  spark  of  generous  feeHng,  that 
rejoices  in  the  presence  of  good  in  a  fellow-being,  has  not 
dwelt  with  pleasure  on  the  thought  that  T.orrl  Byron's 
unhappy  career  was  ennobled  and  purified  tow  ■  '  its  close 
by  a  high  and  sympathetic  purpose,  by  honest  and  energetic 
efforts  for  his  fellow-men?  Who  has  not  read  with  deep 
emotion  those  last  pathetic  lines,  beautiful  as  the  after-glow 
of  sunset,  in  \vhich  love  and  resignation  are  mingled  with 
something  of  a  melancholy  heroism?  Who  has  not  lingered 
with  compassion  over  the  dying  scene  at  Missolonghi — the 
sufferer's  inability  to  make  his  farewell  messages  of  love 
intelligible,  and  the  last  long  hours  of  silent  pain?  Yet  for 
the  sake  of  furnishing  his  disciples  with  a  ''ready  reply," 
Dr.  CumiTii ng  can  prevail  on  himself  to  inoculate  them  with 
a  bad-spirited  falsity  like  the  following : 

"We  have  one  striking  exhibition  of  an  ijifidct  s  brightest  thoughts, 
in  some  lines  written  in  his  dying  mo7iie7iis  by  a  man,  gifted  witli 
great  genius,  capable  of  prodigious  inteUectual  prowess,  but  of  worth- 
less principle,  and  yet  more  worthless  practices — I  mean  the  cele- 
brated Lord  Byron.    He  says — 

"  'Though  gay  companions  o'er  the  bowl 
Dispel  awhile  the  sense  of  ill, 
Though  pleasure  fills  the  maddening  so 
The  heart — the  heart  is  lonely  still. 

Ay,  but  to  di*e,  and  go,  alas ! 

Where  all  have  gone  and  all  must  go  ; 
To  be  the  Nothing  that  I  was, 

Ere  born  to  life  and  living  woe  ! 

Count  o'er  the  joys  thine  hours  have  seen, 
Count  o'er  thy  days  from  anguish  free, 
And  know,  whatever  thou  hast  been, 
'  Tis  somethi7ig  better  not  to  be. 

Nay,  for  myself,  so  dark  my  fate 

Through  every  turn  of  life  hath  been 
Man  and  the  wo7-ld  so  much  I  hate, 

1  Clio  not  wlicn  I  quit  the  scene.'  " 

It  is  difficult  to  suppos  J  that  Dr.  Gumming  can  have  been 
so  grossly  imposed  upon— that  he  can  be  so  ill-informed  as 
really  to  believe  that  these  Mnes  were  ''written"  by  Lord 


96 


EVANGELICAL  TEACHING 


Byron  in  his  dying  moments;  but,  allowing  him  the  full  bene- 
fit of  that  possibility,  how  shall  we  explain  his  introduction 
of  this  feebly  rabid  doggerel  as  "  an  infidel's  brightest 
thoughts?" 

,  In  marshaUing  the  evidences  of  Christianity,  Dr.  Gumming 
directs  most  of  his  arguments  against  opinions  that  are  either 
totally  imaginary,  or  that  belong  to  the  past  rather  than  to 
the  present;  while  he  entirely  fails  to  meet  the  difficulties  actu- 
ally felt  and  urged  by  those  who  are  unable  to  accept  Reve- 
lation. There  can  hardly  be  a  stronger  proof  of  misconcep- 
tion as  to  the  character  of  free-thinking  in  the  present  day 
than  the  recommendation  of  Leland's  "Short  and  Easy 
Method  with  the  Deists'' — a  method  which  is  unquestionably 
short  and  easy  for  preachers  disinclined  to  consider  their 
stereotyped  modes  of  thinking  and  arguing,  but  which  has 
quite  ceased  to  realize  those  epithets  in  the  conversion  of 
Deists.  Yet  Dr.  Gumming  not  only  recommends  this  book, 
but  takes  the  trouble  himself  to  write  a  feebler  version  of  its 
arguments.  For  example,  on  the  question  of  the  genuineness 
and  authenticity  of  the  New  Testament  writings,  he  says : 

"  If,  therefore,  at  a  period  long  subsequent  to  the  death  of  Christ,  a 
number  of  men  had  appeared  in  the  world,  drawn  up  a  book  which  they 
christened  by  the  name  of  Holy  Scripture,  and  recorded  these  things 
which  appear  in  it  as  facts  when  they  were  only  the  fancies  of  their 
own  imagination,  surely  the  Jews  would  have  instantly  reclaimed 
that  no  such  events  transpired,  that  no  such  person  as  Jesus  Christ 
appeared  in  their  capital,  and  that  their  crucifixion  of  him,  and  their 
alleged  evil  treatment  of  his  apostles,  were  mere  fictions." — "Manual 
of  Christian  Evidences,"  p.  8i, 

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  say  that,  in  such  argument  as 
this,  Dr.  Gumming  is  beating  the  air.  He  is  meeting  an 
hypothesis  which  no  one  holds,  and  totally  missing  the  real 
question.  The  only  type  of  infidel"  whose  existence  Dr. 
Gumming  recognizes  is  that  fossil  personage  who  "calls  the 
Bible  a  lie  and  a  forgery."  He  seems  to  be  ignorant — or  he 
chooses  to  ignore  the  fact — that  there  is  a  large  body  of  emi- 
nently instructed  and  earnest  men  who  regard  the  Hebrew 
and  Christian  Scriptures  as  a  series  of  historical  documents, 
to  be  dealt  with  according  to  the  rules  of  historical  criticism  ; 
and  that  an  equally  large  number  of  men,  who  are  not 
historical  critics,  find  the  dogmatic  scheme  built  on  the 
letter  of  the  Scriptures  opposed  to  their  profoundesi  moral 
convictions.     Dr.  Cumming's  infidel  is  a  man  who,  because 


DR.  CUM  MING. 


97 


hi  life  is  vicious,  tries  to  convince  himself  that  there  is  no 
God,  and  that  Christianity  is  an  imposture,  but  who  is  all  the 
while  secretly  conscious  that  he  is  opposing  the  truth,  and 
cannot  help  "letting  out"  admissions  "that  the  Bible  is  the 
Book  of  God."  We  are  favored  with  the  following  "Creed 
of  the  Infidel:" 

"  I  believe  that  there  is  no  God,  but  that  matter  is  God,  and  God  is 
matter;  and  that  it  is  no  matter  whether  there  is  any  God  or  not.  I 
believe  also  that  the  world  was  not  made,  but  that  the  world  made 
itself,  or  that  it  had  no  beginning,  and  that  it  will  last  forever.  I 
beheve  that  man  is  a  beast ;  that  the  soul  is  the'body,  and  that  the 
body  is  the  soul ;  and  that  after  death  there  is  neither  body  nor  soul. 
I  believe  that  there  is  no  religion,  that  natural  religion  is  the  only  reli- 
gion, and  all  religion  unnatm'al.  I  believe  not  in  Moses  ;  I  believe  in 
the  first  philosphers.  I  beheve  not  in  the  evangehsts  ;  I  believe  in 
Chubb,  ColUns,  Toland,  Tindal,  and  Hobbes.  I  believe  in  Lord 
BoUngbroke,  and  I  believe  not  in  St.  Paul.  I  believe  not  in  revela- 
tion ;  /  believe  in  tradition  ;  I  believe  in  the  Talmud  ;  I  believe  in  the 
Koran  ;  I  believe  not  in  the  Bible  ;  I  believe  in  Socrates ;  I  believe  in 
Confucius  ;  I  believe  in  Mahomet  ;  I  believe  not  in  Christ.  And  lastly, 
I  believe  in  all  unbelief." 

The  intellectual  and  moral  monster  whose  creed  is  this 
complex  web  of  contradictions  is,  moreover,  according  to 
Dr.  Gumming,  a  being  who  unites  much  simplicity  and 
imbecility  with  his  Satanic  hardihood,  much  tenderness  of 
conscience  with  his  obdurate  vice.    Hear  the  "proof:" 

"  1  once  met  with  an  acute  and  enlightened  infidel,  with  whom  I 
reasoned  day  after  day,  and  for  hours  together  ;  I  submitted  to  him 
the  internal,  the  external,  and  the  experimental  evidences,  but  made 
no  impression  on  his  scorn  and  unblief.  At  length  I  entertained  a 
suspicion  that  there  was  something  morally,  rather  than  intellectually 
wrong,  and  that  the  bias  was  not  in  the  intellect,  but  in  the  heart ;  one 
day,  therefore,  I  said  to  him,  •  I  must  now  state  my  conviction,  and 
you  may  call  me  uncharitable,  but  duty  compels  me  :  you  are  living 
in  some  known  and  gross  sin.'  The  jnan's  counte7iance  became  pale  ; 
he  bowed  and  left  me'' — "  Manual  of  Christian  Evidences,"  p.  254. 

Here  we  have  the  remarkable  psychological  phenomenon 
of  an  "acute  and  enlightened"  man  who,  deliberately  pur- 
posing to  indulge  in  a  favorite  sin,  and  regarding  the  Gospel 
with  scorn  and  unbehef,  is  nevertheless  so  much  more 
scrupulous  than  the  majority  of  Christians  that  he  cannot 
"  embrace  sin  and  the  Gospel  simultaneously  ;  "  Avho  is  so 
alarmed  at  the  Gospel  in  which  he  does  not  believe,  that  he 
cannot  be  easy  without  trying  to  crush  it;  whose  acuteness 
and  enlightenment  suggest  to  him,  as  a  means  of  crushing 
Essays— 4. 


98 


EVANGELICAL  TEACHING: 


the  Gospel,  to  argue  from  day  to  day  with  Dr.  Cumming; 
and  who  is  withal  so  naive  that  he  is  taken  by  surprise  when 
Dr.  Cumming,  faihng  in  argument,  resorts  to  accusation,  and 
so  tender  in  conscience  that,  at  the  mention  of  his  sin,  he 
turns  pale  and  leaves  the  spot.  If  there  be  any  human  mind 
in  existence  capable  of  holding  Dr.  Cumming's  Creed  of 
the  Infidel,"  of  at  the  same  time  believing  in  tradition  and 
''beheving  in  all  unbelief,"  it  must  be  the  mind  of  the  infidel 
just  described,  for  whose  existence  we  have  Dr-  Cumming's 
ex  officio  word  as  a  theologian ;  and  to  theologians  we  may 
apply  what  Sancho  Panza  says  of  the  bachelors  of  Salamanca, 
that  they  never  tell  lies — except  when  it  suits  their  purpose. 

The  total  absence  from  Dr.  Cumming's  theological  mind 
of  any  demarcation  between  fact  and  rhetoric  is  exhibited 
in  another  passage,  where  he  adopts  the  dramatic  form; 

"  Ask  the  peasant  on  the  hills — and  I  have  asked  amid  the  moun- 
tains of  Braemar  and  Deeside — '  How  do  you  know  that  this  book  is 
divine,  and  that  the  religion  you  profess  is  true  ?  You  never  read 
Paley  ? '  '  No,  I  never  heard  of  him.'  '  You  have  never  read  Butler  ? ' 
'  No,  I  have  never  heard  of  him.'  '  Nor  Chalmers  ?'  '  No,  I  do  not 
know  him.'  'You  have  never  read  any  books  on  evidence?'  'No,  I 
have  read  no  such  books.'  'Then,  how  do  you  know  this  book  is 
true  ? '  '  Know  it !  Tell  me  that  the  Dee,  the  Clunie,  and  the  Garra- 
walt,  the  streams  at  my  feet,  do  not  run  ;  tRat  the  winds  do  not  sigh 
amid  the  gorges  of  these  blue  hills ;  that  the  sun  does  not  kindle  the 
peaks  of  Loch-na-Gar — tell  me  my  heart  does  not  beat,  and  I  will 
believe  you  ;  but  do  not  tell  me  the  Bible  is  not  divine.  I  have  found 
its  truth  illuminating  my  footsteps  ;  its  consolations  sustaining  my  \ 
heart.  May  my  tongue  cleave  to  my  mouth's  roof,  and  my  right  ' 
hand  forget  its  cunning,  if  I  ever  deny  what  is  my  deepest  inner 
experience,  that  this  blessed  book  is  the  Book  of  God.  '  " — "  Church 
Before  the  Flood,"  p.  35. 

Dr.  Cumming  is  so  slippery  and  lax  in  his  mode  of  pre- 
sentation that  we  find  it  impossible  to  gather  whether  he 
means  to  assert  that  this  is  what  a  peasant  on  the  moun- 
tains of  Braemar  did  say,  or  that  it  is  what  such  a  peasant 
ivoidd  say :  in  the  one  case,  the  passage  may  be  taken  as  a 
measure  of  his  truthfulness  ;  in  the  other,  of  his  judgment. 

His  own  faith,  apparently,  has  not  been  altogether  intuitive, 
like  that  of  his  rhetorical  peasant,  for  he  tells  us  ("Apoc. 
Sketches,"  p.  405)  that  he  has  himself  experienced  what  it 
is  to  hcfve  reUgious  doubts.  "I  was  tainted  while  at  the 
University  by  this  spirit  of  scepticism.  I  thought  Christi- 
rinity  might  not  be  true.  The  very  possibility  of  its  being 
true  was  the  thought  I  felt  1  must  meet  and  settle.  Con- 


DR.  GUMMING. 


99 


science  could  give  me  no  peace  till  1  had  settled  it.  I  read, 
and  I  have  read  from  that  day,  for  fourteen  or  fifteen  years, 
till  this,  and  now  I  am  as  convinced,  upon  the  clearest  evi- 
dence, that  this  book  is  the  Book  of  God  as  that  I  now 
address  you."  This  experience,  however,  instead  of  impress- 
ing on  him  the  fact  that  doubt  may  be  the  stamp  of  a  truth- 
loving  mind — that  suut  qiiibns  non  credidisse  honor  est,  et  jidei 
futures  pignus — seems  to  have  produced  precisely  the  con- 
trary effect.  It  has  not  enabled  him  even  to  conceive  the 
condition  of  a  mind  ''perplexed  in  faith  but  pure  in  deed," 
craving  light,  yearning  for  a  faith  that  will  harmonize  and 
cherish  its  highest  powers  and  aspirations,  but  unable  to 
find  that  faith  in  dogmatic  Christianity.  His  own  doubts 
apparently  were  of  a  different  kind.  Nowhere  in  his  pages 
have  we  found  a  humble,  candid,  sympathetic  attempt  to 
meet  the  difficulties  that  may  be  felt  by  an  ingenuous  mind. 
Everywhere  he  supposes  that  the  doubter  is  hardened,  con- 
ceited, consciously  shutting  his  eyes  to  the  light — a  fool 
who  is  to  be  answered  according  to  his  folly — that  is,  with 
ready  replies  made  up  of  reckless  assertions,  of  apocryphal 
anecdotes,  and,  where  other  resources  fail,  of  vituperative 
imputations.  As  to  the  reading  which  he  has  prosecuted 
for  fifteen  years — either  it  has  left  him  totall}^  ignorant  of 
the  relation  which  his  own  religious  creed  bears  to  the  criti- 
cism and  philosophy  of  the  nineteenth  century,  or  he  sys- 
tematically blinks  that  criticism  and  that  philosophy ;  and 
instead  of  honestly  and  seriously  endeavoring  to  meet  and 
solve  what  he  knows  to  be  the  real  difficulties,  contents 
himself  with  setting  up  popinjays  to  shoot  at,  for  the  sake 
of  confirming  the  ignorance  and  winning  the  cheap  admira- 
tion of  his  evangelical  hearers  and  readers.  Like  the  Catho- 
lic preacher  who,  after  throwing  down  his  cap  and  apostro- 
phizing it  as  Luther,  turned  to  his  audience  and  said,  "  You 
see  this  heretical  fellow  has  not  a  word  to  say  for  himself," 
Dr.  Gumming,  having  drawn  his  ugly  portrait  of  the  infidel, 
and  put  arguments  of  a  convenient  qiiality  into  his  mouth, 
finds  a  "  short  and  easy  method  "  of  confounding  this  *'  croak- 
ing frog." 

In  his  treatment  of  infidels,  we  imagine  he  is  guided  by  a 
mental  process  which  may  be  expressed  in  the  following  syl- 
logism :  Whatever  tends  to  the  glory  of  God  is  true  ;  it  is 
for  the  glory  of  God  that  infidels  should  be  as  bad  as  possi- 


lOO 


EVANGELICAL  TEACHING: 


ble ;  therefore,  whatever  tends  to  show  that  infidels  are  as 
bad  as  possible  is  true.  All  infidels,  he  tells  us,  have  been 
men  of  "  gross  and  licentious  lives."  Is  there  not  some  well- 
known  unbeliever — David  Hume,  for  example — of  whom 
even  Dr.  Cumming's  readers  may  have  heard  as  an  excep- 
tion ?  No  matter.  Some  one  suspected  that  he  was  not  an 
exception  ;  and  as  that  suspicion  tends  to  the  glory  of  God, 
it  is  one  for  a  Christian  to  entertain.  (See  "Man.  of  Ev.,"  p. 
73.)  If  we  were  unable  to  imagine  this  kind  of  self-sophis- 
tication, we  should  be  obliged  to  suppose  that,  relying  on 
the  ignorance  of  his  evangehcal  disciples,  he  fed  them  with 
direct  and  conscious  falsehoods.  Voltaire,"  he  informs 
them,  "declares  there  is  no  God  ;  "  he  was  "an  antitheist — 
that  is,  one  who  deliberately  and  avowedly  opposed  and 
hated  God ;  who  swore  in  his  blasphemy  that  he  would 
dethrone  him;"  and  "advocated  the  very  depths  of  the 
lowest  sensuality."  With  regard  to  many  statements  of  a 
similar  kind,  equally  at  variance  with  truth,  in  Dr.  Cumming's 
volumes,  we  presume  that  he  has  been  misled  by  hearsay  or 
by  the  second-hand  character  of  his  acquaintance  with  free- 
thinking  literature.  An  evangelical  preacher  is  not  obliged 
to  be  well  read.  Here,  however,  is  a  case  which  the  extrem- 
est  supposition  of  educated  ignorance  will  not  reach.  Even 
books  of  "  evidences "  quote  from  Voltaire  the  line — 

"  Si  Dieu  n'existait  pas,  il  faudrait  I'inventer  ;  " 

even  persons  fed  on  the  mere  whey  and  buttermilk  of  litera- 
ture must  know  that  in  philosophy  Voltaire  was  nothing  if 
not  a  theist— ^must  know  that  he  wrote  not  against  God,  but 
against  Jehovah,  the  God  of  the  Jews,  whom  he  believed  to 
be  the  false  God — must  know  that  to  say  Voltaire  was  an 
atheist  on  this  ground  is  as  absurd  as  to  say  that  a  Jacobite 
opposed  hereditary  nionarchy  because  he  declared  the  Bruns- 
wick family  had  no  title  to  the  throne.  That  Dr.  Gumming 
should  repeat  the  vulgar  fables  about  Voltaire's  death  is 
merely  what  we  might  expect  from  the  specimens  we  have 
seen  of  his  illustrative  stories.  A  man  whose  accounts  of  his 
own  experience  are  apocryphal  is  not  likely  to  put  borrowed 
narratives  to  any  severe  test. 

The  alliance  between  intellectual  and  moral  perversion  is 
strikingly  typified  by  the  way  in  which  he  alternates  from 
tlie*  unveracious  to  the  absurd,  from  misrepresentation  to  con- 
tiiafetion.    Side  by  side  with  the  adductiuii  of  ♦*  facts such 


DR.  GUMMING. 


as  those  we  have  quoted,  we  find  him  arguing  on  one  page 
that  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  was  too  grand  to  have  been 
conceived  by  man,  and  was  therefore  divine  ;  and  on  another 
page,  that  the  Incarnation  had  been  preconceived  by  man, 
and  \?>  therefore  to  be  accepted  as  divine.  But  we  are  less 
concerned  with  the  fallacy  of  his  "ready  replies"  than  with 
their  falsity ;  and  even  of  this  we  can  only  afford  space  for  a 
very  few  specimens.  Here  is  one:  "There  is  a  thousand 
times  more  proof  that  the  Gospel  of  John  was  written  by  him 
than  there  is  that  the  ^Ava  Bavis'  was  written  by  Xenophon, 
or  the  '  Ars  Poetica'by  Horace."  If  Dr.  Gumming  had 
chosen  Plato's  Epistles  or  Anacreon's  Poem's,  instead  of  the 
Anabasis"  or  the  "Ars  Poetica,"  he  would  have  reduced 
the  extent  of  the  falsehood,  and  would  have  furnished  a  ready 
reply,  which  would  have  been  equally  effective  with  his 
Sunday-school  teachers  and  their,  disputants.  Hence  we 
conclude  this  prodigality  of  misstatement,  this  exuberance 
of  mendacity,  is  an  effervescence  of  zeal  m  majorem  gloriam 
Dei.  Elsewhere  he  tells  us  that  "the  idea  of  the  author  of 
the  'Vestiges'  is,  that  man  is  the  development  of  a  monkey, 
that  the  monkey  is  the  embryo  man;  so  that  if  you  keep  a 
baboon  long  enough  it  ivill  develop  itself  into  a  man!'  How 
well  Dr.  Gumming  has  qualified  himself  to  judge  of  the  ideas 
in  "that  very  unphilosophical  book,"  as  he  pronounces  it, 
may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  he  implies  the  author  of 
the  "Vestiges"  to  have  originated  the  nebular  hypothesis. 

In  the  volume  from  which  the  last  extract  is  taken,  even 
the  hardihood  of  assertion  is  surpassed  by  the  suicidal  char- 
acter of  the  argument.  It  is  called  "  The  Church  Before  the 
Flood,''  and  is  devoted  chiefly  to  the  adjustment  of  the  ques- 
tion between  the  Bible  and  Geology.  Keeping  within  the 
limits  we  have  prescribed  to  ourselves,  we  do  not  enter  into 
the  matter  of  this  discussion ;  we  merely  pause  a  little  over 
the  volume  in  order  to  point  out  Dr.  Cumming's  mode  of 
treating  the  question.  He  first  tells  us  that  ''the  Bible  has 
not  a  single  scientific  error  in  it ;"  that  ''its  slightest  intima- 
tions of  scientific  principles  or  natural  phe^iomena  have  in 
every  instance  been  demonstrated  to  be  exactly  and  strictly 
true  f  and  he  asks: 

"How  is  it  that  Mdses,  with  no  greater  ecfucation  than  the  Hindoo 
or  the  ancient  philosoplier,  lias  written  liis  book,  touching  science  at  a 
thousand  points,  so  accurulely  lIulL  scientihc  research  iiab  discovered 


I02 


EVANGELICAL  TEACHING: 


no  flaws  in  it ;  and  yet  in  those  investigations  which  have  taken  place 
in  more  recent  centuries  it  has  not  been  shown  that  he  has  committed 
one  single  error,  or  made  one  sohtary  assertion  which  can  be  proved 
by  the  maturest  science,  or  by  the  most  eagle-eyed  philosopher,  to  be 
incorrect,  scientifically  or  historically?" 

According  to  this,  the  relation  of  the  Bible  to  science 
should  be  one  of  the  strong  points  of  apologists  for  revela- 
tion :  the  scientific  accuracy  of  Moses  should  stand  at  the 
head  of  their  evidences;  and  they  might  urge  with  some 
cogency  that  since  Aristotle,  who  devoted  himself  to  science, 
and  lived  many  ages  after  Moses,  does  little  else  than  err 
ingeniously,  this  fact,  that  the  Jewish  lawgiver,  though 
touching  science  at  a  thousand  points,  has  written  nothing 
that  has  not  been  demonstrated  to  be  exactly  and  strictly 
true,"  is  an  irrefragable  proof  of  his  having  derived  his 
knowledge  from  a  supernatural  source.  How  does  it  happen, 
then,  that  Dr.  Gumming  forsakes  this  strong  position?  How 
is  it  that  we  find  him,  some  pages  further  on,  engaged  in 
reconciling  Genesis  with  the  discoveries  of  science,  by  means 
of  imaginative  hypotheses  and  feats  of  "interpretation"? 
Surely  that  which  has  been  demonstrated  to  be  exactly  and 
strictly  true  does  not  require  hypothesis  and  critical  argu- 
ment, in  order  to  show  that  it  may  possibly  agree  with  those 
very  discoveries  by  means  of  which  its  exact  and  strict  truth 
has  been  demonstrated.  And  why  should  Dr.  Gumming 
suppose,  as  we  shall  presently  find  him  supposing,  that  men 
of  science  hesitate  to  accept  the  Bible  because  it  appears  to 
contradict  their  discoveries?  By  his  own  statement,  that 
appearance  of  contradiction  does  not  exist ;  on  the  contrary, 
it  has  been  demonstrated  that  the  Bible  precisely  agrees  with 
their  discoveries.  Perhaps,  however,  in  saying  of  the  Bible 
that  its  ''slightest  intimations  of  scientific  principles  or  natural 
phenomena  have  in  every  instance  been  demonstrated  to  be 
exactly  and  strictly  true,"  Dr.  Gumming  merely  means  to 
imply  that  theologians  have  found  out  a  way  of  explaining 
the  Biblical  text  so  that  it  no  longer,  in  their  opinion,  appears 
to  be  in  contradiction  with  the  discoveries  of  science.  One 
of  two  things,  therefore :  either,  he  uses  language  without  the 
slightest  appreciation  of  its  real  meaning;  or,  the  assertions 
he  makes  on  one  page  are  directly  contradicted  by  the  argu- 
ments he  urges  on  anpther. 

Dr.  Gumming's  principles— or,  we  should  rather  say,  con- 
fused notions — of  Biblical  interpretation,  as  exliibited  in  this 


DR.  GUMMING. 


103 


volume,  are  particularly  significant  of  his  mental  calibre. 
He  says  ("Church  before  the  Flood,"  p.  93): 

"Men  of  science,  who  are  full  of  scientific  investigation,  and 
enamoured  of  scientific  discovery,  will  hesitate  before  they  accept  a 
book  which,  they  think,  contradicts  the  plainest  and  the  most  unequiv- 
ocal disclosures  they  have  made  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  or  among 
the  stars  of  the  sky.  To  all  these  we  answer,  as  we  have  already 
indicated,  there  is  not  the  least  dissonance  between  God's  written  book 
and  th'e  most  mature  discoveries  of  geological  science.  One  thing, 
however,  there  may  be  :  there  may  be  a  contradiction  betuueen  the 
discoveries  of  geology  and  our  preconceived  interpretations  of  the 
Bible.  But*this  is  not  because  the  Bible  is  wrong,  but  because  our 
interpretation  is  wron^."    (The  italics  in  all  cases  are  our  own.) 

Elsewhere  he  says: 

"  It  seems  to  me  plainly  evident  that  the  record  of  Genesis,  when 
read  fairly,  and  not  in  the  light  of  our  prejudices^ — and,  mind  you,  the 
essence  of  Popery  is  to  read  the  Bible  in  the  light  of  our  opinions, 
instead  of  viewing  our  opinions  in  the  light  of  the  Bible,  in  its  plain 
and  obvious  sense — falls  in  perfectly  with  the  assertion  of  geologists." 

On  comparing  these  two  passages,  we  gather  that  when 
Dr.  Gumming,  under  stress  of  geological  discovery,  assigns 
to  the  Biblical  text  a  meaning  entirely  different  from  that 
which,  on  his  own  showing,  was  universally  ascribed  to  it  for 
more  than  three  thousand  years,  he  regards  himself  as 
viewing  his  opinions  in  the  light  of  the  Bible  in  its  plain 
and  obvious  sense!"  Now  he  is  reduced  to  one  of  two 
alternatives:  either  he  must  hold  that  the  ''plain  and  obvious 
meaning''  lies  in  the  sum  of  knowledge  possessed  by  each 
successive  age — the  Bible  being  an  elastic  garment  for  the 
growing  thought  of  mankind ;  or  he  must  hold  that  some 
portions  are  amenable  to  this  criterion,  and  others  not  so. 
In  the  former  case,  he  accepts  the  principle  of  interpretation 
adopted  by  the  early  German  rationalists ;  in  the  latter  case, 
he  has  to  show  a  further  criterion  by  which  we  can  judge 
what  parts  of  the  Bible  are  elastic  and  what  rigid.  If  he  says 
that  the  interpretation  of  the  text  is  rigid  wherever  it  treats 
of  doctrines  necessary  to  salvation,  we  answer,  that  for  doc- 
trines to  be  necessary  to  salvation  they  must  first  be  true ;  and 
in  order  to  be  true,  according  to  his  own  principle,  they  must 
be  founded  on  a  correct  interpretation  of  the  Biblical  text. 
Thus  he  makes  the  necessity  of  doctrines  to  salvation  the 
criterion  of  infallible  interpretation  and  infallible  interpretation 
the  criterion  of  doctrines  being  necessary  to  salvation.  He 
is  whirled  round  in  a  circle,  having,  by  admitting  the  princi- 


I04 


EVANGELICAL  TEACHING 


pie  of  novelty  in  interpretation,  completely  deprived  himself 
of  a  basis.  That  he  should  seize  the  very  moment  in  which 
he  is  most  palpably  betraying  that  he  has  no  test  of  Biblical 
truth  beyond  his  own  opinion,  as  an  appropriate  occasion  for 
flinging  the  rather  novel  reproach  against  Popery  that  its 
essence  is  to  '*read  the  Bible  in  the  hght  of  our  opinions," 
would  be  an  almost  pathetic  self-exposure,  if  it  were  not  dis- 
gusting. Imbecility  that  is  not  even  meek,  ceases  to  be 
pitiable  and  becomes  simply  odious. 

Parenthetic  lashes  of  this  kind  against  Popery  are  very 
frequent  with  Dr.  Gumming,  and  occur  even  in  his  more 
devout  passages,  where  their  introduction  must  surely  disturb 
the  spiritual  exercises  of  his  hearers.  Indeed,  Roman  Cath- 
olics fere  worse  with  him  even  than  infidels.  Infidels  are 
the  small  vermin — the  mice  to  be  bagged  e7i  passant.  The 
main  object  of  his  chase — the  rats  which  are  to  be  nailed  up 
as  trophies — are  the  Roman  Catholics.  Romanism  is  the 
masterpiece  of  Satan.  But  reassure  yourselves !  Dr.  Cum- 
ming  has  been  created.  Antichrist  is  enthroned  in  the 
Vatican;  but  he  is  stoutly  withstood  by  the  Boanerges  of 
Crown  Court.  The  personality  of  Satan,  as  might  be 
expected,  is  a  very  prominent  tenet  in  Dr.  Cumming's  dis- 
courses ;  those  who  doubt  it  are,  he  thinks,  "  generally  speci- 
mens of  the  victims  of  Satan  as  a  triumphant  seducer ;  "  and 
it  is  through  the  medium  of  this  doctrine  that  he  habitually 
contemplates  Roman  Catholics.  They  are  the  puppets  of 
which  the  devil  holds  the  strings.  It  is  only  exceptionally 
that  he  speaks  of  them  as  fellow-men,  acted  on  by  the  same 
desires,  fears,  and  hopes  as  himself,  his  rule  is  to  hold  them 
up  to  his  hearers  as  foredoomed  instruments  of  Satan,  and 
vessels  of  wrath.  If  he  is  obliged  to  admit  that  they  arc 
*' no  shams,"  that  they  are  thoroughly  in  earnest" — that  is 
because  they  are  inspired  by  hell,  because  they  are  under  ai^ 
"infra-natural"  influence.  If  their  missionaries  are  founci 
wherever  Protestant  missionaries  go,  this  zeal  in  propagating 
their  faith  is  not  in  them  a  consistent  virtue,  as  it  is  in  Pro- 
testants, but  a  "melancholy  fact,"  affording  additional  evi- 
dence that  they  are  instigated  and  assisted  by  the  devil 
And  Dr.  Cumming  is  incliened  to  think  thiit  they  work 
miracles,  because  that  is  no  more  than  might  be  expected 
from  the  known  ability  of  Satan,  who  inspires  them.*  He 

*  "  Signs  of  the  times,"  p.  38. 


CUMMING. 


admits,  indeed,  that  "there  is  a  fragment  of  the  Church  of 
Christ  in  the  very  bosom  of  that  awful  apostasy,"  *  and  that 
there  are  members  of  the  Church  of  Rome  in  glory;  but 
this  admission  is  rare  and  episodical — is  a  declaration,  pro 
forma,  about  as  influential  on  the  general  disposition  and 
habits  as  an  aristocrat's  profession  of  democracy. 

This  leads  us  to  mention  another  conspicuous  characteris- 
tic of  Dr.  Cumming's  teaching — the  absence  of  genuine  charity. 
It  is  true  that  he  makes  large  profession  of  tolerance  and  lib- 
erality within  a  certain  circle ;  he  exhorts  Christians  to  unity; 
he  would  have  Churchmen  fraternize  with  Dissenters,  and 
exhorts  these  two  branches  of  God's  family  to  defer  the  set- 
tlement of  their  differences  till  the  millennium.  But  the  love 
thus  taught  is  the  love  of  the  clan^  which  is  the  correlative 
of  antagonism  to  the  rest  of  mankind.  It  is  not  sympathy 
and  helpfulness  towards  men  as  men,  but  towards  men  as 
Christians,  and  as  Christians  in  the  sense  of  a  small  min- 
ority. Dr.  Cumming's  religion  may  demand  a  tribute  of 
love,  but  it  gives  a  charter  to  hatred ;  it  may  enjoin  charity, 
but  it  fosters  all  uncharitableness.  If  I  believe  that  God  tells 
me  to  love  my  enemies,  but  at  the  same  time  hates  his  own 
enemies  and  requires  me  to  have  one  will  with  him,  which 
has  the  larger  scope,  love  or  hatred  ?  And  we  refer  to  those 
pages  of  Dr.  Cumming's  in  which  he  opposes  Roman  Cath- 
olics, Puseyites,  and  infidels — pages  which  form  the  larger  pro- 
portion of  what  he  has  published — for  proof  that  the  idea  of 
God  which  both  the  logic  and  spirit  of  his  discourses  keep 
present  to  his  hearers  is  that  of  a  God  who  hates  his  enemies, 
a  God  who  teaches  love  by  fierce  denunciations  of  wrath,  a 
God  who  encourages  obedience  to  his  precepts  by  elaborately 
revealing  to  us  that  his  own  government  is  in  precise  oppo- 
sition to  those  precepts.  We  know  the  usual  evasions  on 
this  subject.  We  know  Dr.  Gumming  would  say  that  even 
Roman  Catholics  are  to  be  loved  and  succored  as  men ;  that 
he'would  help  even  that  ''unclean  spirit,"  Cardinal  Wiseman, 
out  of  a  ditch.  But  who  that  is  in  the  slightest  degree 
acquainted  with  the  action  of  the  human  mind,  will  believe 
that  any  genuine  and  large  charity  can  grow  out  of  an 
exercise  of  love  which  is  always  to  have  an  arriere-pensee  ot 
hatred?    Of  what  quality  would  be  the  conjugal  love  of  a 


i 


*  "  Apoc  Sketches,"  p.  243. 


io6 


EVANGELICAL  lEACHLNG : 


husband  who  loved  his  spouse  as  a  wife,  but  hated  her  as 
a  woman  ?  It  is  reserved  for  the  regenerate  mind,  accord- 
ing to  Dr.  Cumming's  conception  of  it,  to  be  "  wise,  amazed, 
temperate  and  furious,  loyal  and  neutral,  in  a  moment." 
Precepts  of  charity  uttered  with  faint  breath  at  the  end  of  a 
sermon  are  perfectly  futile,  when  all  the  force  of  the  lungs 
has  been  spent  in  keeping  die  hearer's  mind  fixed  on  the 
conception  of  his  fellow-men,  not  as  fellow-sinners  and  fellow- 
sufferers,  but  as  agents  of  hell,  as  automata  through  whom 
Satan  plays  his  game  on  earth ;  not  on  objects  which  call 
forth  their  reverence,  their  love,  their  hope  of  good  even  in 
the  most  strayed  and  perverted,  but  on  a  minute  idenfica- 
tion  of  human  things  with  such  symbols  as  the  scarlet 
whore,  the  beast  out  of  the  abyss,  scorpions  whose  sting  is 
in  their  tails,  men  who  have  the  mark  of  the  beast,  and 
unclean  spirits  like  frogs.  You  might  as  well  attempt  to 
educate  a  child's  sense  of  beauty  by  hanging  its  nursery  with 
the  horrible  and  grotesque  pictures  in  which  the  early  paint- 
ers represented  the  last  judgment,  as  expect  Christian 
graces  to  flourish  on  that  prophetic  interpretation  which 
Dr.  Gumming  offers  as  the  principal  nutriment  of  his  flock. 
Quite  apart  from  the  critical  basis  of  that  interpretation, 
quite  apart  from  the  degree  of  truth  there  may  be  in  Dr. 
Cumming's  prognostications — questions  into  which  we  do 
not  choose  to  enter — his  use  of  prophecy  must  be  a  priori 
condemned  in  the  judgment  of  right-minded  persons,  by 
its  results  as  testified  in  the  net  moral  effect  of  his  sermons. 
The  best  minds  that  accept  Christianity  as  a  divinely 
inspired  system  believe  that  the  great  end  of  the  Gospel  is 
not  merely  the  saving  but  the  educating  of  men's  souls,  the 
creating  within  them  of  holy  dispositions,  the  subduing  of 
egoistical  pretensions,  and  the  perpetual  enhancing  of  the 
desire  that  the  will  of  God — a  will  synonymous  with  good- 
ness and  truth — may  be  done  on  earth.  But  what  relati9n 
to  all  this'has  a  system  of  interpretation  which  keeps  the  mind 
of  the  Christian  in  the  position  of  a  spectator  at  a  gladiatorial 
show,  of  which  Satan  is  the  wild  beast  in  the  shape  of  the 
great  red  'dragon,  and  two  thirds  of  mankind  the  victims — 
the  whole  'provided  and  got  up  by  God  for  the  edification  of 
the  -saints !  The  demonstration  that  the  Second  Advent  is 
at  hand,  if  true,  can  have  no  really  holy,  spiritual  effect ;  the 
highest  state  of  mind  inculcated  by  the  Gospel  is  resignation 


DR.  GUMMING. 


107 


to  the  disposal  of  God's  providence — "Whether  we  live,  we 
live  unto  the  Lord ;  whether  we  die,  we  die  unto  the  Lord  " 
—not  an  eagerness  to  see  a  temporal  manifestation  which 
shall  confound  the  enemies  of  God  and  give  exaltation  to  the 
saints;  it  is  to  dwell  in  Christ  by  spiritual  communion  with 
his  nature,  not  to  fix  the  date  when  he  shall  appear  in  the 
sky.  Dr.  Cumming's  delight  in  shadowing  forth  the  down- 
fall of  the  Man  of  Sin,  in  prognosticating  the  battle  of  Gog 
and  Magog,  and  in  advertising  the  pre-millennial  Advent, 
is  simply  the  transportation  of  political  passions  on  to  a 
so-called  religious  platform;  it  is  the  anticipation  of  the 
triumph  of'*  our  party,"  accomplished  by  our  principal  men 
being  ''sent  for"  into  the  clouds.  Let  us  be  understood  to 
speak  in  all  seriousness.  If  we  were  in  search  of  amuse- 
ment, we  should  not  seek  for  it  by  examining  Dr.  Cum- 
ming's works  in  order  to  ridicule  them.  We  are  even 
simply  discharging  a  disagreeable  duty  in  delivering  our 
opinion  that,  judged  by  the  highest  standard  of  ortho- 
dox Christianity,  they  are  little  calculated   to  produce 

"  A  closer  walk  with  God, 
A  calm  and  heavenly  frame  ;  " 

but  are  more  likely  to  nourish  egoistic  complacency  and  pre- 
tension, a  hard  and  condemnatory  spirit  towards  one's  fel- 
low-men, and  a  busy  occupation  with  the  minutiae  of  events, 
instead  of  a  reverent  contemplation  of  great  facts  and  a  wise 
application  of  great  principles.  It  would  be  idle  to  consider 
Dr.  Cumming's  theory  of  prophecy  in  any  other  light;  as  a 
philosophy  of  history,  or  a  specimen  of  Biblical  interpreta- 
tion, it  bears  about  the  same  relation  to  the  extension  of 
genuine  knowledge  as  the  astrological  "house  "  in  the  heav- 
ens bears  to  the  true  structure  and  relations  of  the  universe. 

The  sHght  degree  in  which  Dr.  Cumming's  faith  is  imbued 
with  truly  human  sympathies  is  exhibited  in  the  \va\'  he  treats 
the  doctrine  of  eternal  punishment.  Here  a  little  of  that 
readiness  to  strain  the  letter  of  the  Scriptures  which  he  so 
often  manifests  when  his  object  is  to  prove  a  point  against 
Romanism,  would  have  been  an  amiable  frailty  if  it  had  been 
appUed  on  the  side  of  mercy.  When  he  is  bent  on  proving 
that  the  prophecy  concerning  the  Man  of  Sin,  in  the  Second 
Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,  refers  to  the  Pope,  he  can 
extort  from  the  innocent  word  kaoioai  the  meaning  catJie- 
dfizei  though  why  we  are  to  translate  "He  as  God  cathe- 
.  ■  .  ',1 


ro8 


EVANGELICAL  TEACHING: 


drizes  in  the  temple  of  God,"  any  more  than  we  are  to  trans- 
late "  cathedrize  here,  while  I  go  and  pray  yonder,"  it  is  for 
Dr.  Camming  to  show  more  clearly  than  he  has  yet  done. 
But  when  rigorous  literality  will  favor  the  conclusion  that  the 
greater  proportion  of  the  human  race  will  be  eternally  miser- 
able, then  he  is  rigorously  literal.    He  says  : 

"The  Greek  words,  e\s  to  us  alwvas  twv  alwvTvv,  here  translated 
'  everlasting,'  signify  literally  '  unto  the  ages  of  ages  ; '  aXel  wv,  'always 
being,'  that  is,  everlasting,  ceaseless  existence.  Plato  uses  the  word 
in  this  sense  when  he  says,  'The  gods  that  Hve  forever.'  But  I  must 
also  admit  that  this  word  is  used  several  times  in  a  limited  extent — as 
for  instance,  '  The  everlasting  hills. '  Of  course,  this  does  not  mean 
that  there  never  will  be  a  time  when  the  hills  will  cease  to  stand  ;  the 
expression  here  is  evidently  figurative,  but  it  imphes  eternity.  The 
hills  shall  remain  as  long  as  the  earth  lasts,  and  no  hand  has  power  to 
remove  them  but  that  Eternal  One  which  first  called  them  into  being ; 
so  the  state  of  the  soul  remains  the  same  after  death  as  long  as  the 
soul  exists,  and  no  one  has  power  to  alter  it.  The  same  word  is  often 
applied  to  denote  the  existence  of  God — 'the  Eternal  God.'  Can  we 
limit  the  word  when  applied  to  him  ?  Because  occasionally  used  in  a 
limited  sense,  we  must  not  infer  it  is  always  so.  'Everlasting'  plainly 
means  in  Scripture  '  without  end ; '  it  is  only  to  be  explained  figuratively 
when  it  is  evident  it  cannot  be  interpreted  in  any  other  way." 

We  do  not  discuss  whether  Dr.  Cumming's  interpretation 
accords  with  the  meaning  of  the  New  Testament  writers: 
we  simply  point  to  the  fact  that  the  text  becomes  elastic  for 
him  when  he  wants  freer  play  for  his  prejudices;  while  he 
makes  it  an  adamantine  barrier  against  the  admission  that 
mercy  will  ultimately  triumph,  that  God — i.  e.,  Love — will 
be  all  in  all.  He  assures  us  that  he  does  not  ''  delight  to 
dwell  on  the  misery  of  the  lost;  "  and  we  beheve  him.  That 
misery  does  not  seem  to  be  a  question  of  feeling  with 
him,  either  one  way  or  the  other.  He  does  not  merely 
resign  himself  to  the  awful  mystery  of  eternal  punishment ; 
he  contends  for  it.  Do  we  object,  he  asks,*  to  everlasting 
happiness?  then  why  object  to  everlasting  misery? — reason- 
ing which  is  perhaps  felt  to  be  cogent  by  theologians  who 
anticipate  the  everlasting  happiness  for  themselves,  and  the 
everlasting  misery  for  their  neighbors. 

The  compassion  of  some  Christians  has  been  glad  to  take 
refuge  in  the  opinion  that  the  Bible  allows  the  supposition  of 
annihilation  for  the  impenitent;  but  the  rigid  sequence  of 
Dr.  Cumming's  reasoning  will  not  admit  of  this  idea.  He 
sees  that  flax  is  made  into  linen,  and  linen  into  paper ;  that 


"Manual  of  Christian  Evidence,"  p.  184. 


DR.  CUMM/NG. 


109 


paper,  when  burned,  partly  ascends  as  smoke,  and  then 
again  descends  in  rain,  or  in  dust  and  carbon.  "  Not  one 
particle  of  the  original  flax  is  lost,  although  there  may  be 
not  one  particle  that  has  not  undergone  an  entire  change ; 
annihilation  is  not,  but  change  of  form  is.  //  ivill  be  tints 
with  our  bodies  at  the  resurrection.  The  death  of  the  body 
means  not  annihilation.  Not  one  feature  of  the  face  will  be 
annihilated."  Having  established  the  perpetuity  of  the  body 
by  this  close  and  clear  analogy — namely,  that  as  there  is  a 
total  change  in  the  particles  of  flax  in  consequence  of  which 
they  no  longer  appear  as  flax,  so  there  will  not  be  a  total 
change  in  the  particles  of  the  human  body,  but  they  will 
reappear  as  the  human  body — -he  does  not  seem  to  consider 
that  the  perpetuity  of  the  body  involves  the  perpetuity  of  the 
soul,  but  requires  separate  evidence  for  this,  and  finds  such 
evidence  by  begging  the  very  question  at  issue :  namely,  by 
asserting  that  the  text  of  the  Scriptures  implies  **the  perpe- 
tuity of  the  punishment  of  the  lost,  and  the  consciousness  of 
the  punishment  which  they  endure."  Yet  it  is  drivelling 
like  this  which  is  listened  to  and  lauded  as  eloquence  by 
hundreds,  and  which  a  doctor  of  divinity  can  believe  that  he 
has  his  "reward  as  a  saint"  for  preaching  and  publishing! 

One  more  characteristic  of  Dr.  Cumming's  writings,  and 
we  have  done.  This  is  the  perverted  moral  judgment  that 
everywhere  reigns  in  them.  Not  that  this  perversion  is 
peculiar  to  Dr.  Gumming  ;  it  belongs  to  the  dogmatic  system 
which  he  shares  with  all  evangelical  believers.  But  the 
abstract  tendencies  of  systems  are  represented  in  very  differ- 
ent degrees,  according  to  the  different  characters  of  those 
who  embrace  them  ;  just  as  the  same  food  tells  differently 
on  different  constitutions :  and  there  are  certain  qualities  in 
Dr.  Gumming  that  cause  the  p^jrversion  of  which  we  , speak 
to  exhibit  itself  with  peculiar  prominence  in  his  teaching. 
A  single  extract  will  enable  us  to  explain  what  we  mean  : 

"The  'thoughts'  are  evil.  If  it  were  possible  for  human  eye  10 
discern  and  to  detect  the  thoughts  that  flutter  round  the  heart  of  an 
unregenerate  man — to  mark  their  hue  and  their  mukitude — it  would 
be  found  that  they  are  indeed  'evil.'  We  speak  not  of  the  thief,  an4 
the  murderer,  and  the  adulterer,  and  suchhke,  whose  crimes  draw 
down  the  cognizance  of  earthly  tribunals,  and  whose  unenviable  char- 
acter it  is  to  take  the  lead  in  the  paths  of  sin  ;  but  wc  refer  to  the  men 
Who  are  marked  out  by  their  practice  of  many  of  the  seemliest  moral- 
ities of  life — by  the  exercise  of  the  kindliest  affections,  and  the  inter- 


EVANGELICAL  TEACHING: 


change  of  the  sweetest  reciprocities — and  of  these  men,  if  unrenewed 
and  unchanged,  we  pronounce  that  their  thoughts  are  evil.  To  ascer- 
tain this,  we  must  refer  to  the  object  around  which  our  thought  ought 
continually  to  circulate.  The  Scriptures  assert  that  this  object  is  the 
glory  of  God ;  that  for  this  we  ought  to  think,  to  act,  and  to  speak; 
and  that  in  thus  thinking,  acting  and  speaking,  there  is  involved  the 
purest  and  most  endearing  bliss.  Now  it  will  be  found  true  of  the 
most  amiable  men,  that  with  all  their  good  society  and  kindliness  of 
heart,  and  all  their  strict  and  unbending  integrity,  they  never,  or 
rarely,  think  of  the  glory  of  God.  The  question  never  occurs  to  them 
— Will  this  redound  to  the'  glory  of  God  ?  Will  this  make  his  name 
more  known,  his  being  more  loved,  his  praise  more  sung?  And  just 
inasmuch  as  their  every  thought  comes  short  of  this  lofty  aim,  in  so 
much  does  it  come  short  of  good,  and  entitle  itself  to  the  character  of 
evil.  If  the  glory  of  God  is  not  the  absorbing  and  the  influential  aim 
of  their  thoughts,  then  they  are  evil ;  but  God's  glory  never  enters  into 
their  minds.  They  are  amiable  because  it  chances  to  be  one  of  the 
constitutional  tendencies  of  their  individual  character,  left  uneffaced 
by  the  Fall ;  and  they  are  just  and  upright,  because  they  have 
perhaps  no  occasions  to  be  otherwise,  or  find  it  subservient  to  their 
interests  to  maintain  such  a  character'' — "  Occ.  Disc,"  vol.  i.  p.  8. 

Again  we  read  (ibid.,  p.  236) : 

"There  are  traits  in  the  Christian  character  which  the  mere  worldly 
man  cannot  understand.  He  can  understand  the  outward  morality, 
but  he  cannot  understand  the  inner  spring  of  it ;  he  can  understand 
Dorcas's  liberahty  to  the  poor,  but  he  cannot  penetrate  the  ground  of 
Dorcas's  liberality.  Some  men  give  to  the  poor  because  they  are  osten- 
tatious, or  because  they  think  the  poor  will  ultimately  avenge  their 
neglect ;  but  the  Christian  gives  to  the  poor,  not  only  because  he  has 
sensibilities  like  other  men,  but  because  inasmuch  as  ye  did  it  to  the 
least  of  these  my  brethren,  ye  did  it  unto  me." 

Before  entering  on  the  more  general  question  involved  in 
these  quotations,  we  must  point  to  the  clauses  we  have 
marked  with  italics,  where  Dr.  Gumming  appears  to  express 
sentiments  which,  we  are  happy  to  think,  are  not  shared  by 
the  majority  of  his  brethren  in  the  faith.  Dr.  Gumming,  it 
seems,  is  unable  to  conceive  that  the  natural  man  can  have 
any  other  motive  tor  being  just  and  upright  than  that  it  is 
useless  to  be  otherwise,  or  that  a  character  for  honesty  ig 
profitable ;  according  to  his  experience,  between  the  feelings 
of  ostentation  and  selfish  alarm  and  the  feeling  of  love  to 
Ghrist,  there  lie  no  sensibilities  which  can  lead  a  man  to 
relieve  want.  Granting,  as  we  should  prefer  to  think,  that  it 
is  Dr.  Gumming's  exposition  of  his  sentiments  which.  I;", 
deficient  rather  than  his  sentiments  themseh-es,  stiil,  tlic  'iu  t 
that  the  deficiency  hes  precisely  here,  and  tb;:t  lie  can  ci 


DR.  GUMMING. 


Ill 


look  it  not  only  in  the  haste  of  oral  delivery  but  in  the  cxaru- 
ination  of  proof-sheets,  is  stongly  significant  of  his  mental 
bias — of  the  faint  degree  in  which  he  sympathizes  with  the 
disinterested  elements  of  human  feeling,  and  of  the  fact, 
which  we  are  about  to  dwell  upon,  that  those  feelings  are 
totally  absent  from  his  religious  theory.  Now,  Dr.  Gum- 
ming invariably  assumes  that,  in  fulminating  against  those 
who  differ  from  him,  he  is  standing  on  a  moral  elevation  to 
which  they  are  compelled  reluctantly  to  look  up ;  that  his 
theory  of  motives  and  conduct  is  in  its  loftiness  and  purity 
a  perpetual  rebuke  to  their  low  and  vicious  desires  and  prac- 
tice. It  is  time  he  should  be  told  that  the  reverse  is  the 
fact ;  that  there  are  men  who  do  not  merely  cast  a  super- 
ficial glance  at  his  doctrine,  and  fail  to  see  its  beauty  or 
justice,  but  who,  after  a  close  consideration  of  that  doctrine, 
pronounce  it  to  be  subversive  of  true  moral  development, 
and  therefore  positively  noxious.  Dr.  Gumming  is  fond  of 
showing  up  the  teaching  of  Romanism,  and  accusing  it  of 
undermining  true  morality :  it  is  time  he  should  be  told  that 
there  is  a  large  body,  both  of  thinkers  and  practical  men, 
who  hold  precisely  the  same  opinion  of  his  own  teaching — 
with  this  difference,  that  they  do  not  regard  it  as  the  inspira- 
tion of  Satan,  but  as  the  natural  crop  of  a  human  mind 
where  the  soil  is  chiefly  made  up  of  egoistic  passions  and 
dogmatic  beliefs. 

Dr.  Gumming's  theoiy,  as  we  have  seen,  is  that  actions  are 
good  or  evil  according  as  they  are  prompted  or  not  prompted 
by  an  exclusive  reference  to  the  ''glory  of  God."  God,  then, 
in  Dr.  Gumming's  conception,  is  a  being  who  has  no  pleasure 
in  the  exercise  of  love  and  truthfulness  and  justice,  consid- 
ered as  affecting  the  well-being  of  his  creatures ;  he  has  sat- 
isfaction in  us  only  in  so  far  as  we  exhaust  our  motives  and 
dispositions  of  all  relation  to  our  fellow-beings,  and  replace 
sympathy  with  men  by  anxiety  for  the  ''glory  of  God."  The 
deed  of  Grace  Darling,  when  she  took  a  boat  in  the  storm 
to  rescue  drowning  men  and  women,  was  not  good  if  it  was 
only  compassion  that  nerved  her  arm  and  impelled  her  to 
brave  death  for  the  chance  of  saving  others  ;  it  was  only 
good  if  she  asked  herself — Will  this  redound  to  the  glory  of 
God  ?  The  man  who  endures  tortures  rather  than  betray  a 
trust,  the  man  who  spends  years  in  toil  in  order  to  discharge 
an  obligation  from  which  the  law  declares  him  free,  must  be 


EVANGELICAL  TEACHING: 


animated  not  by  the  sprnt  of  fidelity  to  his  fellow-man,  but 
by  a  desire  to  make  ''the  name  of  God  more  known."  The 
sweet  charities  of  domestic  life — the  ready  hand  and  the 
soothing  word  in  sickness,  the  forbearance  towards  frailties 
the  prompt  helpfulness  in  all  efforts  and  sympathy  in  all 
joys— are  simply  evil  if  they  result  from  a  "constitutional 
tendency,"  or  from  dispositions  disciplined  by  the  experience 
of  suffe-rmg  and  the  perception  of  moral  loveliness.  A  wife 
is  not  to  devote  herself  to  her  husband  out  of  love  to  him 
and  a  sense  of  the  duties  implied  by  a  close  relation — she  is 
to  be  a  faithful  wife  for  the  glory  of  God ;  if  she  feeis  her 
natural  affections  welling  up  too  strongly,  she  is  to  repress 
them :  it  will  not  do  to  act  from  natural  affection — she  must 
think  of  the  glory  of  God.  A  man  is  to  guide  his  affairs  with 
energy  and  discretion,  not  from  an  honest  desire  to  fulfil  his 
responsibilities  as  a  member  of  society  and  a  father,  but  that  v 
''God's  praise  may  be  sung."  Dr.  Cumming's  Christian 
pays  his  debts  for  the  glory  of  God :  were  it  not  for  the  coer- 
cion of  that  supreme  motive,  it  would  be  evil  to  pay  them. 
A  man  is  not  to  be  just  from  a  feeling  of  justice;  he  is  not 
to  help  his  fellow-men  out  of  good-will  to  his  fellow-men  ; 
he  is  not  to  be  a  tender  husband  and  father  out  of  affection : 
all  these  natural  muscles  and  fibres  are  to  be  torn  away  and 
replaced  by  a  patent  steel-spring-anxiety  for  the  "  glory  of 
God." 

Happily,  the  constitution  of  human  nature  forbids  the 
complete  prevalence  of  such  a  theory.  Fatally  powerful  as 
religious  systems  have  been,  human  nature  is  stronger  and 
wider  than  religious  systems,  and  though  dogmas  may  ham- 
per, they  cannot  absolutely  repress  its  growth:  build  walls 
round  a  living  tree  as  you  will,  the  bricks  and  mortar  have 
by-and-by  to  give  way  before  the  slow  and  sure  operation 
of  the  sap.  But  next  to  that  hatred  of  the  enemies  of  God 
which  is  the  principle  of  persecution,  there  perhaps  has  been 
no  perversion  more  obstructive  of  true  moral  development 
than  this  substitution  of  a  reference  to  the  glory  of  God  for 
the  direct  promptings  of  the  sympathetic  feelings.  Benevo- 
lence and  justice  are  strong  only  in  proportion  as  they  are 
directly  and  inevitably  called  into  activity  by  their  proper 
objects  :  pity  is  strong  only  because  we  are  strongly  impressed 
by  suffering;  and  only  in  proportion  as  it  is  compassion  that 
speaks  through  the  eyes  when  we  soothe,  and  moves  the  arm 


DR.  CUMMING. 


113 


when  we  succor,  is  a  deed  strictly  benevolent.  If  the  sooth- 
ing or  the  succor  be  given  because  another  being  wishes  o: 
approves  it,  the  deed  ceases  to  be  one  of  benevolence,  and 
becomes  one  of  deference,  of  obedience,  of  self-interest,  or 
vanity.  Accessory  motives  may  aid  in  producing  an  action, 
but  they  presuppose  the  weakness  of  the  direct  motive ;  and 
conversely,  when  the  direct  motive  is  strong,  the  action  of 
accessory  motives  will  be  excluded.  If  then,  as  Dr.  Gum- 
ming inculcates,  the  glory  of  God  is  to  be  "the  absorbing 
and  the  influential  aim "  in  our  thoughts  and  actions,  this 
must  tend  to  neutralize  the  human  sympathies ;  the  stream 
of  feeling  will  be  diverted  from  its  natural  current  in  order 
to  feed  an  artificial  canal.  The  idea  of  God  is  really  moral 
in  its  influence,  it  really  cherishes  all  that  is  best  and  love- 
liest in  man,  only  when  God  is  contemplated  as  sympathiz- 
ing with  the  pure  elements  of  human  -feeling,  as  possessing 
infinitely  all  those  attributes  which  we  recognize  to  be  moral 
in  humanity.  In  this  light,  the  idea  of  God  and  the  sense  of 
his  presence  intensify  all  noble  feeling,  and  encourage  all 
noble  effort,  on  the  same  principle  that  human  sympathy  is 
found  a  source  of  strength  :  the  brave  man  feels  braver  when 
he  knows  that  another  stout  heart  is  beating  time  with  his ; 
the  devoted  woman  who  is  wearing  out  her  years  in  patient 
effort  to  alleviate  suffering  or  save  vice  from  the  last  stages 
of  degradation  finds  aid  in  the  pressure  of  a  friendly  hand 
which  tells  her  that  there  is  one  who  understands  her  deeds, 
and  in  her  place  would  do  the  like.  The  idea  of  a  God  who 
not  only  sympathizes  with  all  we  feel  and  endure  for  our 
fellow-men,  but  who  will  pour  new  life  into  our  too  languid 
love,  and  give  firmness  to  our  vacillating  purpose,  is  an 
extension  of  multiplication  of  the  effects  produced  by  human 
sympathy;  and  it  has  been  intensified  for  the  better  spirits 
who  have  been  under  the  influence  of  orthodox  Christianity, 
by  the  contemplation  of  Jesus  as  "  God  manifest  in  the 
flesh."  But  Dr.  Cumming's  God  is  the  very  opposite  of  all 
this :  he  is  a  God  who,  instead  of  sharing  and  aiding  our 
human  sympathies,  is  directly  in  collision  with  them ;  who, 
instead  of  strengthening  the  bond  between  man  and  man,  by 
encouraging  the  sense  that  they  are  both  alike  the  objects  of 
his  love  and  care,  thrusts  himself  between  them  and  forbids 
them  to  feel  for  each  other  except  as  they  hax^e  relation  to 
him.    He  is  a  God  who,  instead  of  adding  his  solar  force 


114 


EVANGELICAL  TEACHING: 


to  swell  the  tide  of  those  impulses  that  tend  to  give  human- 
ity a  common  life  in  which  the  good  of  one  is  the  good  of 
all,  commands  us  to  check  those  impulses,  lest  they  should 
prevent  us  from  thinking  of  his  glory.  It  is  in  vain  for 
Dr.  Gumming  to  say  that  we  are  to  love  man  for  God's 
sake:  with  the  conception  of  God  which  his  teaching 
presents,  the  love  of  God  for  man's  sake  involves,  as  his 
writings  abundantly  show,  a  strong  principle  of  hatred. 
We  can  only  love  one  being  for  the  sake  of  another  when 
there  is  an  habitual  delight  I'n  associating- the  idea  of  those 
two  beings — that  is,  when  the  object  of  our  indirect  love  is 
a  source  of  joy  and  honor  to  the  object  of  our  direct  love. 
But,  according  to  Dr.  Cumming's  theory,  the  majority  of 
mankind — the  majority  of  his  neighbors — are  in  precisely 
the  opposite  relation  to  God.  His  soul  has  no  pleasure  in 
them:  they  belong  more  to  Satan  than  to  him;  and  if  they 
contribute  to  his  glory,  it  is  against  their  will.  Dr  Cum. 
ming,  then,  can  only  love  some  men  for  God's  sake;  the 
rest  he  must  in  consistency  hate  for  God's  sake. 

There  must  be  many,  even  in  the  circle  of  Dr.  Cumming's 
admirers,  who  would  be  revolted  by  the  doctrine  we  have 
just  exposed,  if  their  natural  good  sense  and  healthy  feehng 
were  not  early  stifled  by  dogmatic  beliefs,  and  their  rever- 
ence misled  by  pious  phrases.  But  as  it  is,  many  a  rational 
question,  many  a  generous  instinct,  is  repelled  as  the  sugges- 
tion of  a  supernatural  enemy,  or  as  the  ebullition  of  human 
pride  and  corruption.  This  state  of  inward  contradiction  can 
be  put  an  end  to  only  by  the  conviction  that  the  free  and  dil- 
igent exertion  of  the  intellect,  instead  of  being  a  sin,  is  a  part 
of  their  responsibility — that  Right  and  Reason  are  synony- 
mous. The  fundamental  faith  for  man  is  faith  in  the  result 
of  a  brave,  honest,  and  steady  use  of  all  his  faculties : 

"Let  knowledge  grow  from  more  to  more, 
But  more  of  reverence  in  us  dwell ; 
That  mind  and  soul  according  well 
May  make  one  music  as  before, 
But  vaster. 

Before  taking  leave  of  Dr.  Cumming,  let  us  express  a  hope 
that  we  have  in  no  case  exaggerated  the  unfavorable  char- 
acter of  the  inferences  to  be  drawn  from  his  pages.  His 
creed  often  obliges  him  to  hope  the  worst  of  men,  and  to 
exert  himself  in  proving  that  the  worst  is  true;  but  thus  far 
we  are  happier  than  he.    We  have  no  theory  which  requires 


LECKrS  HISTORY. 


us  to  attribute  unworthy  motives  to  Dr.  Cumming,  no  opin- 
ions, religious  or  irreligious,  whicli  can  make  it  a  gratifica- 
tion to  us  to  detect  him  i?i  deHnquencies.  On  the  contrary, 
the  better  we  are  able  to  think  of  him  as  a  man,  while  we 
are  obliged  to  disapprove  of  him  as  a  theologian,  the  stronger 
will  be  the  evidence  for  our  conviction  that  the  tendency 
towards  good  in  human  nature  has  a  force  which  no  creed 
can  utterly  counteract,  and  which  insures  the  ultimate  tri- 
umph of  that  tendency  over  all  dogmatic  perversions. 


THE  INFLUENCE  OF  RATIONALISM :  LECKY'S 
HISTORY. 


There  is  a  valuable  class  of  books  on  great  subjects  which 
have  something  of  the  character  and  functions  of  good  pop- 
ular lecturing.  They  are  not  original,  not  subtile,  not  of 
close  logical  texture,  not  exquisite  either  in  thought  or  style ; 
but  by  virtue  of  these  negatives  they  are  all  the  more  fit  to  act 
on  the  average  intelligence.  They  have  enough  of  organiz- 
ing purpose  in  them  to  make  their  facts  illustrative,  and  to 
leave  a  distinct  result  in  the  mind,  even  when  most  of  the 
facts  are  forgotten ;  and  they  have  enough  of  vagueness  and 
vacillation  in  their  theory  to  win  them  ready  acceptance  from 
a  mixed  audience.  The  vagueness  and  vacillation  are  not 
devices  of  timidity  ;  they  are  the  honest  result  of  the  writer's 
own  mental  character,  which  adapts  him  to  be  the  instructor 
and  the  favorite  of  "the  general  reader."  For  the  most  part, 
the  general  reader  of  the  present  day  does  not  exactly  know 
what  distance  he  goes ;  he  only  knows  that  he  does  not  go 
"too  far."  Of  any  remarkable  thinker  whose  writings  have 
excited  controversy,  he  likes  to  have  it  said  that  "his  errors 
are  to  be  deplored,"  leaving  it  not  too  certain  what  those 
errors  are ;  he  is  fond  of  what  may  be  called  disemhi  died 
opinions,  that  float  in  vapory  phrases  above  all  systems  of 
thought  or  action;  he  likes  an  undefined  Christianity  which 
opposes  itself  to  nothing  in  particular,  an /undefined  educa- 
tion of  the  people,  an  undefined  amelioration  of  all  things ; 


ii6  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  RATIONALISM: 


in  fact,  he  likes  sound  views — nothing  extreme,  but  some- 
thing between  the  excesses  of  the  past  and  the  excesses  of 
the  present.  This  modern  type  of  the  general  reader  may 
be  known  in  conversation  by  the  cordiality  with  which  he 
assents  to  indistinct,  blurred  statements;  say  that  black  \z 
black,  he  will  shake  his  head  and  hardly  think  it ;  say  that: 
black  is  not  so  very  black,  he  will  reply,  '*  Exactly."  He  ha? 
no  hesitation,  if  you  wish  it,  even  to  get  up  at  a  public  meet- 
ing and  express  his  conviction  that  at  times,  and  within  cer- 
tain limits,  the  radii  of  a  circle  have  a  tendency  to  be  equal ; 
but,  on  the  other  hand,  he  would  urge  that  the  spirit  of  geo- 
metry may  be  carried  a  little  too  far.  His  only  bigotry  is  a 
bigotry  against  any  clearly  defined  opinion ;  not  in  the  least 
based  on  a  scientific  scepticism,  but  belonging  to  a  lack  of 
coherent  thought — a  spongy  texture  of  mind,  that  gravitates 
strongly  to  nothing.  The  one  thing  he  is  staunch  for  is  the 
utmost  liberty  of  private  laziness. 

But  precisely  these  characteristics  of  the  general  reader, 
rendering  him  incapable  of  assimilating  ideas  unless  they 
are  administered  in  a  highly  diluted  form,  make  it  a  matter 
of  rejoicing  that  ,  there  are  clever,  fair  minded  men,  who  will 
write  books  for  him — men  very  much  above  him  in  know- 
ledge and  ability,  but  not  too  remote  from  him  in  their  habits 
of  thinking,  and  who  can  thus  prepare  for  him  infusions  of 
history  and  science  that  will  leave  some  solidifying  deposit, 
and  save  him  from  a  fatal  softening  of  the  intellectual  skele- 
ton. Among  such  serviceable  writers,  Mr.  Lecky's''  History 
of  the  Rise  and  Influence  of  the  Spirit  of  Rationalism  in 
Europe "  entitles  him  to  a  high  place.  He  has  prepared 
himself  for  its  production  by  an  unusual  amount  of  well- 
directed  reading;  he  has  chosen  his  facts  and  quotations 
with  much  judgment;  and  he  gives  proof  of  those  important 
moral  qualifications — impartiality,  seriousness,  and  modesty. 
This  praise  is  chiefly  applicable  to  the  long  chapter  on  the 
history  of  magic  and  witchcraft,  which  opens  the  work,  and 
to  the  two  chapters  on  the  antecedents  and  history  of  per- 
secution, which  occur,  the  one  at  the  end  of  the  first  volume, 
the  other  at  the  beginning  of  the  second.  In  these  chapters 
Mr.  Lecky  has  a  narrow  and  better-traced  path  before  him 
than  in  other  portions  of  his  work;  he  is  more  occupied  witli 
presenting  a  particular  class  of  facts  in  their  historical 
sequence,  and  in  their  relation  to  certain  grand  tide-marks 


LECKV'S  HISTORY. 


of  opinion,  than  witli  disquisition  ;  and  his  writin^^  is  freer 
than  elsewhere  from  an  apparent  confusedness  of  thought  and 
an  exuberance  of  approximative  phrases,  which  can  be 
serviceable  in  no  other  way  than  as  dilutents  needful  for  the 
sort  of  reader  we  have  just  described. 

The  history  of  magic  and  witchcraft  has  been  judiciously^ 
chosen  b\'  Mr.  Lecky  as  the  subject  of  his  first  section  on  the 
Declining  Sense  of  the  Miraculous,  because  it  is  strikingly 
illustrative  of  a  position  with  the  truth  of  which  he  is  strongl}- 
impressed,  though  he  may  not  always  treat  of  it  with 
desirable  clearness  and  precision  :  namely,  that  certain  beliefs 
become  obsolete,  not  in  consequence  of  direct  arguments 
against  them,  but  because  of  their  incongruity  with  prevalent 
habits  of  thought.  Here  is  his  statement  of  the  two  **  classes 
of  influences  "  by  which  the  mass  of  men,  in  what  is  called 
civilized  society,  get  their  beliefs  gradually  modified : 

•'If  we  ask  why  it  is  that  the  world  has  rejected  what  was  once  so 
universally  and  so  intensely  believed,  why  a  narrative  of  an  old  woman 
who  had  been  seen  riding  on  a  broomstick,  or  who  was  proved  to  have 
transformed  herself  into  a  wolf,  and  to  have  devoured  the  flocks  of  hei- 
neighbors,  is  deemed  so  entirely  incredible,  most  persons  would  prob- 
.\\)\  \  be  unable  to  give  a  very  definite  answer  to  the  question.  It  is  not 
b  \iuse  we  have  examined  the  evidence  and  found  it  insufficient,  for 
the  disbelief  always  precedes,  Avhen  it  does  not  prevent,  examination. 
It  is  rather  because  the  idea  of  absurdity  is  so  strongly  attached  to 
such  narratives,  that  it  is  difficult  even  to  consider  them  with  gravity. 
Yet  at  one  time  no  such  improbability  was  felt,  and  hundreds  of  per- 
sons have  been  burned  simply  on  the  two  grounds  I  have  mentioned. 

"When  so  complete  a  change  takes  place  in  public  opinion,  it  may 
be  ascribed  to  one  or  other  of  two  causes.  It  may  be  the  result  of  a 
controversy  which  has  conclusively  settled  the  question,  establishing 
to  the  satisfaction  of  all  parties  a  clear  preponderance  of  argument  or 
fact  in  favor  of  one  opinion,  and  making  that  opinion  a  truism  which 
is  accepted  by  all  enlightened  men,  even  though  they  have  not  them- 
selves examined  the  evidence  on  which  it  rests.  Thus,  if  any  one,  in 
a  company  of  ordinarily  educated  persons  were  to  deny  the  modon  of  the 
earth,  or  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  his  statement  would  be  received 
with  derision,  though  it  is  probable  that  some  of  his  audience  would 
be  unable  to  demonstrate  the  first  truth,  and  that  very  few  of  them 
could  give  sufficient  reasons  for  the  second.  They  may  not  themselves 
be  able  to  defend  their  position  ;  but  they  are  aware  that,  at  certain 
known  periods  of  history,  controversies  on  those  subjects  took  place, 
and  that  known  writers  then  brought  forward  some  definite  arguments 
or  experiments,  which  were  ultimately  accepted  by  the  a\  liole  learned 
world  as  rigid  and  conclusive  demonstrations.  It  is  possible,  also,  for 
as  complete  a  change  to  be  effected  by  what  is  called  the  spirit  of  the 
age.  The  general  intellectual  tendencies  pervading  the  literature  of 
a  century  profoundly  modify  the  character  of  the  public  mind.  They 


i  1 8  THE^  I  NFL  UENCE  OF  RA  TIONALISM: 


form  a  new  tone  and  habit  of  thought.  They  alter  the  measure  of 
probabihty.  They  create  new  attractions  and  new  antipathies,  and 
they  eventually  cause  as  absolute  a  rejection  of  certain  old  opinions 
as  could  be  produced  by  the  most  cogent  and  definite  arguments." 

Mr.  Lecky  proceeds  to  some  questionable  views  concern- 
'  ing  the  evidence  of  witchcraft,  which  seem  to  be  irreconcila- 
ble even  with  his  own  remarks  later  on;  but  they  lead  him  to 
the  statement,  thoroughly  made  out  by  his  historical  survey, 
that  "the  movement  was  mainly  silent,  unargumentative, 
and  insensible;  that  men  came  gradually  to  disbelieve  in 
witchcraft,  because  they  came  gradually  to  look  upon  it  as 
absurd;  and  that  this  new  tone  of  thought  appeared,  first  of 
all,  in  those  who  were  least  subject  to  theological  influences, 
and  soon  spread  through  the  educated  laity,  and,  last  of  all, 
took  possession  of  the  clergy." 

We  have  rather  painful  proof  that  this  ''second  class  of 
influences"  with  a  vast  number  go  hardly  deeper  than  fash- 
ion, and  that  witchcraft  to  many  of  us  is  absurd  only  on  the 
same  ground  that  our  grandfathers'  gigs  are  absurd.  It  is 
felt  preposterous  to  think  of  spiritual  agencies  in  connection 
with  ragged  beldames  soaring  on  broomsticks,  in  an  age 
when  it  is  known  that  mediums  of  communications  with  the 
invisible  world  are  usually  unctuous  personages  dressed  in 
excellent  broadcloth,  who  soar  above  the  curtain-poles  with- 
out any  broomstick,  and  who  are  not  given  to  unprofitable 
intrigues.  The  enlightened  imagination  rejects  the  figure  of 
a  witch  with  her  profile  in  dark  relief  against  the  moon  and 
her  broomstick  cutting  a  constellation.  No  undiscovered 
natural  laws,  no  names  of  "respectable"  witnesses,  are 
invoked  to  make  us  feel  our  presumption  in  questioning  the 
diabolic  intimacies  of  that  obsolete  old  woman,  for  it  is 
known  now  that  the  undiscovered  laws,  and  the  witnesses 
qualified  by  the  payment  of  income-tax,  are  all  in  favor  of  a 
different  conception — the  image  of  a  heavy  gentleman  in 
boots  and  black  coat-tails  fore-shortened  against  the  cornice. 
Yet  no  less  a  person  than  Sir  Thomas  Browne  once  wrote 
that  those  who  denied  there  were  witches,  inasmuch  as  they 
thereby  denied  spirits  also,  were  "  obliquely  and  upon  con- 
sequence a  sort,  not  of  infidels,  but  of  atheists."  At  present, 
doubtless,  in  certain  circles,  unbelievers  in  heavy  gentlemen 
who  float  in  the  air  by  means  of  undiscovered  laws  are  also 
taxed  with  atheism ;  illiberal  as  it  is  not  to  admit  that  mere 
weakness  of  understanding  may  prevent  one  from  seeing 


LECKY'S  HISTORY.  119 

how  that  phenomenon  is  necessarily  involved  in  the  divine 
origin  of  things.  With  still  more  remarkable  parallelism,  Sir 
Thomas  Browne  goes  on :  Those  that,  to  refute  their  incred- 
ulity, desire  -to  see  apparitions,  shall  questionless  never 
behold  any,  nor  have  the  power  to  be  so  much  as  witches. 
The  devil  hath  made  them  already  in  a  heresy  as  capital  a.s 
witchcraft,  and  to  appear  to  them  were  but  to  convert  them!' 
It  would  be  difficult  to  see  what  has  been  changed  here  but 
the  mere  drapery  of  circumstance,  if  it  were  not  for  this  prom- 
inent difference  between  our  own  days  and  the  days  of  witch- 
craft, that  instead  of  torturing,  drowning,  or  burning  the  inno- 
cent, we  give  hospitality  and  large  pay  to — the  highly  distin- 
guished medium.  At  least  we  are  safely  rid  of  certain  hor- 
rors; but  if  the  multitude— that  farraginous  concurrence  of 
all  conditions,  tempers,  sexes,  and  ages  " — do  not  roll  back 
even  to  a  superstition  that  carries  cruelty  in  its  train,  it  is  not 
because  they  possess  a  cultivated  reason,  but  because  they  are 
pressed  upon  and  held  up  by  what  we  may  call  an  external 
reason — the  sum  of  conditions  resulting  from  the  laws  of 
material  growth,  from  changes  produced  by  great  historical 
collisions  shattering  the  structures  of  ages  and  making  new 
highways  for  events  and  ideas,  and  from  the  activities  of 
higher  minds  no  longer  existing  merely  as  opinions  and 
teaching,  but  as  institutions  and  organizations  with  which 
the  interests,  the  affections,  and  the  habits  of  the  multitude 
are  inextricably  interwoven.  No  undiscovered  laws  account- 
ing for  small  phenomena  going  forward  under  drawing-room 
tables  are  likely  to  affect  the  tremendous  facts  of  the 
increase  of  population,  the  rejection  of  convicts  by  our 
colonies,  the  exhaustion  of  the  soil  by  cotton  plantations, 
which  urge  even  upon  the  foolish  certain  questions,  certain 
.claims,  certain  views  concerning  the  scheme  of  the  world, 
that  can  never  again  be  silenced.  If  right  reason  is  the 
right  representation  of  the  coexistences  and  sequences  of 
things,  here  are  coexistences  and  sequences  that  do  not 
wait  to  be  discovered,  but  press  themselves  upon  us  like 
bars  of  iron.  No  seances  at  a  guinea  a  head  for  the  sake  of 
being  pinched  by  "Mary  Jane"  can  annihilate  railways, 
steamships,  and  electric  telegraphs,  which  are  demonstrating 
the  interdependence  of  all  human  interests,  and  making  self- 
interest  a  duct  for  sympathy.  These  things  are  part  of  the 
external  reason  to  which  internal  siUiness  has  inevitably  to 
accommodate  itself. 


T20 


THE  INFLUENCE  OF  RATIONALISM: 


Three  points  in  the  history  of  magic  and  witchcraft  arc 
well  brought  out  by  Mr.  Lecky.  First,  that  the  cruelties 
connected  with  it  did  not  begin  until  men's  minds  had 
ceased  to  repose  implicity  in  a  sacramental  system  which 
made  them  feel  well  armed  against  evil  spirits — that  is,  until 
the  eleventh  century,  when  there  came  a  sort  of  morning 
dream  of  doubt  and  heresy,  bringing  on  the  one  side  the 
terror  of  timid  consciences,  and  on  the  other  the  terrorism  of 
authority  or  zeal  bent  on  checking  the  rising  struggle.  In 
that  time  of  comparative  mental  repose,  says  Mr  Lecky — 

"  All  those  conceptions  of  diabolical  presence  ;  all  that  predisposition 
towards  the  miraculous,  wnicn  acted  so  fearfully  upon  the  imagina- 
tions of  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries,  existed  ;  but  the  imphcit 
faith,  the  boundless  and  triumphant  credulity  with  which  the  virtue  of 
ecclesiastical  rites  was  accepted,  rendered  them  comparatively  inno- 
cuous. If  men  had  been  a  little  less  superstitious,  the  effects  of  their 
superstition  would  have  been  much  more  terrible.  It  was  firmly 
believed  that  any  one  who  deviated  from  the  strict  line  of  orthodoxy 
must  soon  succumb  beneath  the  power  of  Satan  ;  but  as  there  was  no 
spirit  of  rebellion  or  doubt,  this  persuasion  did  not  produce  any  extra' 
ordinary  terrorism." 

The  Church  was  disposed  to  confound  heretical  opinion 
with  sorcery;  false  doctrine  was  especially  the  devil's  work, 
and  it  was  a  ready  conclusion  that  a  denier  or  innovator  had 
held  consultation  with  the  father  of  lies.  It  is  a  saying  of  a 
zealous  Catholic  in  the  sixteenth  century,  quoted  by  Maury 
in  his  excellent  work,  "De  la  Magie". — "  Crescit  cum  magia 
hceresis,  cum  hceresi  magia ^  Even  those  who  doubted  were 
terrified  at  their  doubts,  for  trust  -is  more  easily  undermined 
than  terror.  Fear  is  earlier  born  than  hope,  lays  a  stronger 
grasp  on  man's  system  than  any  other  passion,  and  remains 
master  of  a  larger  group  of  involuntary  actions.  A  chief 
aspect  of  man's  moral  development  is  the  slow  subduing  of 
fear  by  the  gradual  growth  of  intelligence,  and  its  suppression 
as  a  motive  by  the  presence  of  impulses  less  animally  selfish ; 
so  that  in  relation  to  invisible  Power,  fear  at  last  ceases  to 
exist,  save  in  that  interfusion  with  higher  faculties  which  we 
call  awe. 

Secondly,  Mr,  Lecky  shows  clearly  that  dogmatic  Protes- 
tantism, holding  the  vivid  belief  in  Satanic  agency  to  be  an 
essential  of  piety,  would  have  felt  it  shame  to  be  a  whit  behind 
Catholicism  in  severity  against  the  devil's  servants.  Luther's 
sentiment  was  that  he  would  not  sufifer  a  witch  to  live  (h^ 


LECKY'S  HISTORY. 


121 


was  not  much  more  merciful  to  Jews);  and,  in  spite  of  his 
fondness  for  children,  believing  a  certain  child  to  have  been 
begotten  by  the  devil,  he  recommended  the  parents  to  throw 
it  into  the  river.  The  torch  must  be  turned  on  the,  worst 
errors  of  heroic  minds — not  in  irreverent  ingratitude,  but 
for  the  sake  of  measuring  our  vast  and  various  debt  to  all 
the  influences  which  have  concurred,  in  the  intervening 
ages,  to  make  us  recognize  as  detestable  errors  the  honest 
convictions  of  men  who,  in  mere  individual  capacity  and 
moral  force,  were  very  much  above  us.  Again,  the  Scotch 
Puritans,  during  the  comparatively  short  period  of  their 
ascendency,  surpassed  all  Christians  before  them  in  the 
elaborate  ingenuity  of  the  tortures  they  applied  for  the  dis- 
covery of  witchcraft  and  sorcery,  and  did  their  utmost  to 
prove  that  if  Scotch  Calvinism  was  the  true  religion,  the 
chief ''note"  of  the  true  rehgion  was  cruelty.  It  is  hardly 
an  endurable  task  to  read  the  story  of  their  doings; 
thoroughly  to  imagine  them  as  a  past  reality  is  already  a 
sort  of  torture.  One  detail  is  enough,  and  it  is  a  compar- 
atively mild  one.  It  was  the  regular  profession  of  men 
called  "prickers"  to  thrust  long  pins  into  the  body  of  a 
suspected  witch  in  order  to  detect  the  insensible  spot  which 
was  the  infallible  sign  of  her  guilt.  On  a  superficial  view 
one  would  tfe  in  danger  of  saying  that  the  main  difference 
between  the  teachers  who  sanctioned  these  things  and  the 
much-despised  ancestors  who  offered  human  victims  inside 
a  huge  wicker  idol  was  that  they  arrived  at  a  more  elaborate 
barbarity  by  a  longer  series  of  dependent  propositions.  I 
do  not  share  Mr.  Buckle's  opinion  that  a  Scotch  minister's 
groans  were  a  part  of  his  deliberate  plan  for  keeping  the 
people  in  a  state  of  terrified  subjection ;  the  ministers  them- 
selves held  the  belief  they  taught,  and  might  well  groan 
over  it.  What  a  blessing  has  a  little  false  logic  been  to  the 
world!  Seeing  that  men  are  so  slow  to  question  their 
premises,  they  must  have  made  each  other  much  more 
miserable,  if  pity  had  not  sometimes  drawn  tender  con- 
clusions not  warranted  by  Major  and  Minor;  if  there  had 
not  been  people  with  an  amiable  imbecility  of  reasoning 
which  enabled  them  at  once  to  cling  to  hideous  beUefs, 
and  to  be  conscientiously  inconsistent  with  them  in  their 
conduct.  There  is  nothing  like  acute  deductive  reasoning 
for  keeping  a  man  in  the  dark:   it  might  be  called  the 


122 


THE  INFLUENCE  OF  RATIONALISM: 


technique  of  the  intellect,  and  the  concentration  of  the 
mind  upon  it  corresponds  to  that  predominance  of  technical 
skill  in  art  which  ends  in  degradation  of  the  artist's  func- 
tion, unless  new  inspiration  and  invention  come  to  guide  it. 

And  of  this  there  is  some  good  illustration  furnished  by 
that  third  node  in  the  history  of  witchcraft,  the  beginning 
of  its  end,  which  is  treated  in  an  interesting  manner  by  Mr. 
Lecky.  It  is  worth  noticing,  that  the  most  important 
defences  of  the  belief  in  witchcraft,  against  the  growing 
scepticism  in  the  latter  part  of  the  sixteenth  century  and  in 
the  seventeenth,  were  the  productions  of  men  who  in  some 
departments  were  among  the  foremost  thinkers  of  their  time. 
One  of  them  was  Jean  Bodin,  the  famous  writer  on  govern- 
ment and  jurisprudence,  whose  /' Republic,"  Hallam  thinks, 
had  an  important  influence  in  England,  and  furnished  ''a 
store  of  arguments  and  examples  that  were  not  lost  on  the 
thoughtful  minds  of  our  countrymen."  In  some  of  his 
views  he  was  original  and  bold ;  for  example,  he  anticipated 
Montesquieu  in  attempting  to  appreciate  the  relations  of 
government  and  climate.  Hallam  inclines  to  the  opinion 
that  he  was  a  Jew,  and  attached  divine  authority  only  to 
the  Old  Testament.  But  this  was  enough  to  furnish  him 
with  his  chief  data  for  the  existence  of  witches  and  for  their 
capital  punishment;  and  in  the  account  of  his***  RepubHc  " 
given  by  Hallam,  there  is  enough  evidence  that  the  sagacity 
which  often  enabled  him  to  make  fine  use  of  his  learning 
was  also  often  entangled  in  it,  to  temper  our  surprise  at  find^ 
ing  a  writer  on  political  science  of  whom  it  could  be  said 
that,  along  with  Montesquieu,  he  was  **the  most  philosophi- 
cal of  those  who  had  read  so  deeply,  the  most  learned  of 
those  who  had  thought  so  much,"  in  the  van  of  the  forlorn 
hope  to  maintain  the  reality  of  witchcraft.  It  should  be  said 
that  he  was  equally  confident  of  the  unreality  of  the  Coper- 
nican  hypothesis,  on  the  ground  that  it  was  contrary  to  the 
tenets  of  the  theologians  and  philosophers  and  to  common 
sense,  and  therefore  subversive  of  the  foundations  of  every 
science.    Of  his  work  on  witchcraft,  Mr.  Lecky  says: 

"  The  '  Demonomanie  des  Sorciers'  is  chiefly  an  appeal  to  authority, 
which  the  author  deemed  on  this  subject  so  unanimous  and  so  con- 
elusive  that  it  was  scarcely  possible  for  any  sane  man  to  resist  it.  He 
appealed  to  the  popular  belief  in  all  countries,  in  all  ages,  and  in  all 
religions.  He  cited  the  opinions  of  an  immense  multitude  of  the  great- 
est writers  of  pagan  antiquity,  and  of  the  most  illustrious  of  the  Fathers, 


LECKY'S  HISTOR  Y. 


123 


He  showed  how  the  laws  of  all  nations  recognized  the  existence  of 
witchcraft ;  and  he  collected  hundreds  of  cases  which  had  been  inves- 
tigated before  the  tribunals  of  his  own  or  of  other  countries.  He  relates 
with  the  most  minute  and  circumstantial  detail,  and  with  the  most 
unfaltering  confidence,  all  the  proceedings  at  the  witches'  Sabbath,  the 
methods  which  the  witches  employed  in  transporting  themselves 
through  the  air,  their  transformations,  their  carnal  intercourse  with  the 
Devil,  their  various  means  of  injuring  their  enemies,  the  signs  that 
lead  to  their  detection,  their  confessions  when  condemned,  and  their 
demeanor  at  the  stake." 

Something  must  be  allowed  for  a  lawyer's  affection  towards 
a  belief  which  had  furnished  so  many  cases."  Bodin's 
work  had  been  immediately  prompted  by  the  treatise  '*De 
Prestigiis  Daemonum,"  written  by  John  Wier,  a  German 
physician — a  treatise  which  is  worth  notice  as  an  example 
of  a  transitional  form  of  opinion  for  which  many  analogies 
may  be  found  in  the  history  both  of  religion  and  science. 
Wier  beheved  in  demons,  and  in  possession  by  demons, 
but  his  practice  as  a  physician  had  convinced  him  that  the 
so-called  witches  were  patients  and  victims,  that  the  devil 
took  advantage  of  their  diseased  condition  to  delude  them, 
and  that  there  was  no  consent  of  an  evil  will  on  the  part  of. 
the  women.  He  argued  that  the  word  in  Leviticus  trans- 
lated *'witch"  meant /'poisoner,"  and  besought  the  princes 
of  Europe  to  hinder  the  further  spilling  of  innocent  blood. 
These  heresies  of  Wier  threw  Bodin  into  such  a  state  of 
amazed  indignation,  that  if  he  had  been  an  ancient  Jew  instead 
of  a  modern  economical  one,  he  would  have  rent  his  garment. 

No  one  had  ever  heard  of  pardon  being  accorded  to  sor- 
cerers ; "  and  probably  the  reason  why  Charles  IX.  died  young 
was  because  he  had  pardoned  the  sorcerer  Trois  Echelles ! 
We  must  remember  that  this  was  in  15  81,  when  the  great 
scientific  movement  of  the  Renaissance  had  hardly  begun- — 
when  Galileo  was  a  youth  of  seventeen,  and  Kepler  a  boy  of 
ten. 

But  directly  afterwards,  on  the  other  side,  came  Montaigne, 
whose  sceptical  acuteness  could  arrive  at  negatives  without 
any  apparatus  of  method.  A  certain  keen  narrowness  of 
nature  will  secure  a  man  from  many  absurd  beliefs  which  the 
.  larger  soul,  vibrating  to  more  manifold  influences,  would  have 
a  long  struggle  to  part  with.  And  so  we  find  the  charming, 
chatty  Montaigne — in  one  of  the  brightest  of  his  essays,  "Des 
Boiteux,"  where  he  declares  that,  from  his  own  observation 


124  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  RATIONALISM: 


of  witches  and  sorcerers,  he  should  have  recommended  them 
to  be  treated  with  curative  hellebore — stating  in  his  own  way 
a  pregnant  doctrine,  since  taught  more  gravely.  It  seems  to 
him  much  less  of  a  prodigy  that  men  should  lie,  or  that  their 
imaginations  should  deceive  them,  than  that  a  human  body 
should  be  carried  through  the  air  on  a  broomstick,  or  up  a 
chimney  by  some  unknown  spirit.  He  thinks  it  a  sad  bus- 
iness to  persuade  one's  self  that  the  test  of  truth  Hes  in  the 
multitude  of  believers — "  en  une  presse  oia  les  fols  surpassent 
de  tant  les  sages  en  nombre.''  Ordinarily,  he  has  observed, 
when  men  have  something  stated  to  them  as  a  fact,  they  are 
more  ready  to  explain  it  than  to  inquire  whether  it  is  real : 
lis  passentpar-dessus  les  propositions,  mais  ils  examinent  les 
consequences ;  ils  laissent  les  choses,  et  courent  aux  causes^ 
There  is  a  sort  of  strong  and  generous  ignorance  which  is  as 
honorable  and  courageous  as  science — "  ignorance  pour  laq- 
uelle  concevoir  il  n'y  a  pas  moins  de  science  qu'a  concevoir  la 
science."  And  a  propos  of  the  immense  traditional  evidence 
which  weighed  with  such  men  as  Bodin,  he  says:  "As  for 
the  proofs  and  arguments  founded  on  experience  and  facts, 
I  do  not  pretend  to  unravel  these.  What  end  of  a  thread  is 
there  to  lay  hold  of?  I  often  cut  them  as  Alexander  did  his 
knot.  Apres  tout,  c' est  mettre  ses  conjectures  a  bien  haut 
prix,  que  denfaire  cidre  un  honime  tout  vif!' 

Writing  like  this,  when  it  finds  eager  readers,  is  a  sign 
that  the  weather  is  changing  ;  yet  much  later,  namely,  after 
1665,  when  the  Royal  Society  had  been  founded,  our  own 
Glanvil,  the  author  of  the  "Scepsis  Scientifica,"  a  work  that 
was  a  remarkable  advance  towards  a  true  definition  of  the 
limits  of  inquiry,  and  that  won  him  his  election  as  fellow  of 
the  society,  published  an  energetic  vindication  of  the  belief 
in  witchcraft,  of  which  Mr.  Lecky  gives  the  following  sketch : 

"The  ' Sadducismus  Triumphatus,'  which  is  probably  the  ablest 
book  ever  published  in  defence  of  the  superstition,  opens  with  a  strik- 
ing picture  of  the  rapid  progress  of  the  scepticism  in  England.  Every- 
where, a  disbelief  in  witchcraft  was  becoming  fashionable  in  the  upper 
classes  ;  but  it  was  a  disbehef  that  arose  entirely  from  a  strong  sense 
of  its  antecedent  improbability.  All  who  were  opposed  to  the  orthodox 
faith  united  in  discrediting  witchcraft.  They  laughed  at  it,  as  pal- 
pably absurd,  as  involving  the  most  grotesque  and  ludicrous  concep- 
tions, as  so  essentially  incredible  that  it  would  be  a  waste  of  time  to 
examine  it.  This  spirit  had  arisen  since  the  Restoration,  although  the 
laws  were  still  in  force,  and  although  little  or  no  direct  reasoning 
had  been  brought  to  bear  upon  the  subject.    In  order  to  combat  it, 


LECKY'S  mSTORV. 


125 


Glanvil  proceeded  to  examine  the  general  question  of  the  credibility 
of  the  miraculous.  He  saw  that  the  reason  why  witchcraft  was  ridi- 
culed was,  because  it  was  a  phase  of  the  miraculous  and  the  work  of 
the  Devil ;  that  the  scepticism  was  chiefly  due  to  those  who  disbelieved 
in  miracles  and  the  Devil ;  and  that  the  instances  of  witchcraft,  or 
possession,  in  the  Bible  were  invariably  placed  on  a  level  \\'ith  those 
that  were  tried  in  the  law  courts  of  England.  That  the  evidence  of 
the  belief  was  overwhelming,  he  firmly  beheved — and  this,  indeed, 
was  scarcely  disputed  ;  but,  until  the  sense  of  a  priori  improbability 
was  removed,  no  possible  accumulation  of  facts  would  cause  men  to 
believe  it.  To  that  task  he  accordingly  addressed  himself.  Antici- 
pating the  idea  and  almost  the  words  of  modern  controversialists,  he 
urged  that  there  was  such  a  thing  as  a  credulity  of  unbelief;  and  that 
those  who  believed  so  strange  a  concurrence  of  delusions,  as  was 
necessary  on  the  supposition  of  the  unreahty  of  witchcraft,  were  far 
more  credulous  than  those  who  accepted  the  belief.  He  made  his 
very  scepticism  his  principal  weapon  ;  and,  analyzing  with  much 
acuteness  the  a  priori  objections,  he  showed  that  they  rested  upon  an 
unwarrantable  confidence  in  our  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  the  spirit 
worlds  ;  that  they  implied  the  existence  of  some  strict  analogy  between 
the  faculties  of  men  and  of  spirits  ;  and  that,  as  such  analogy  most 
probably  did  not  exist,  no  reasoning  based  on  the  supposition  could 
dispense  men  from  examining  'the  evidence.  He  concluded  with  a 
large  collection  of  cases,  the  evidence  of  which  was,  as  he  thought, 
incontestable." 

We  have  quoted  this  .sketch  because  Glanvil's  argument 
against  the  a  priori  objection  of  absurdity  is  fatiguingly 
urged  in  relation  to  other  alleged  marvels  which,  to  busy  peo- 
ple seriously  occupied  with  the  difficulties  of  affairs,  of 
science,  or  of  art,  seem  as  little  worthy  of  examination  as 
aeronautic  broomsticks.  And  also  because  we  here  see 
Glanvil,  in  combating  an  incredulity  that  does  not  happen  to 
be  his  own,  wielding  that  very  argument  of  traditional  evi- 
dence which  he  had  made  the  subject  of  vigorous  attack  in 
his  "Scepsis  Scientifica."  But  perhaps  large  minds  have 
been  peculiarly  liable  to  this  fluctuation  concerning  the 
sphere  of  tradition,  because,  while  they  have  attacked  its 
misapplications,  they  have  been  the  more  solicited  by  the 
vague  sense  that  tradition  is  really  the  basis  of  our  best  life. 
Our  sentiments  may  be  called  organized  traditions;  and  a 
large  part  of  our  actions  gather  all  their  justification,  all 
their  attraction  and  aroma,  from  the  memory  of  the  life  lived, 
of  the  actions  done,  before  we  were  born.  In  the  absence  of 
any  profound  research  into  psychological  functions  or  into 
the  mysteries  of  inheritance,  in  the  absence  of  any  compre- 
hensive view  of  man's  historical  development  and  the  depen- 


126 


THE  INFLUENCE  OF  RATIONALISM: 


dence  of  one  age  on  another,  a  mind  at  all  rich  in  sensibili- 
ties must  always  have  had  an  indefinite  uneasiness  in  an 
undistinguishing  attack  on  the  coercive  influence  of  tradi- 
tion. And  this  may  be  the  apology  for  the  apparent  incon- 
sistency of  Glanvil's  acute  criticism  on  the  one  side,  and  his 
indignation  at  the  "  looser  gentry,"  who  laughed  at  the  evi- 
dences for  witchcraft,  on  the  other.  We  have  already  taken 
up  too  much  space  with  this  subject  of  witchcraft,  else  we 
should  be  tempted  to  dwell  on  Sir  Thomas  Browne,  who  far 
surpassed  Glanvil  in  magnificent  incongruity  of  opinion,  and 
whose  works  are  the  most  remarkable  combination  existing 
of  witty  sarcasm  against  ancient  nonsense  and  modern  obse- 
quiousness, with  indications  of  a  capacious  credulity.  After 
all,  we  may  be  sharing  what  seems  to  us  the  hardness  of  these 
men,  who  sat  in  their  studies  and  argued  at  their  ease  about  a 
belief  that  would  be  reckoned  to  have  caused  more  misery 
and  bloodshed  than  any  other  superstition,  if  there  had  been 
no  such  thing  as  persecution  ogi  the  ground  of  religious 
opinion. 

On  this  subject  of  Persecution,  Mr.  Lecky  writes  his  best: 
with  clearness  of  conception,  with  calm  justice,  bent  on 
appreciating  the  necessary  tendency  of  ideas,  and  with  an 
appropriateness  of  illustration  that  could  be  supplied  only 
by  extensive  and  intelligent  reading.  Persecution,  he  shows, 
is  not  in  any  sense  pecuHar  to  the  CathoHc  Church  ;  it  is  a 
direct  sequence  of  the  doctrines  that  salvation  is  to  be  had 
only  within  the  Church,  and  that  erroneous  belief  is  damna- 
tory— doctrines  held  as  fully  by  Protestant  sects  as  by  the 
Catholics  ;  and,  in  proportion  to  its  power.  Protestantism  has 
been  as  persecuting  as  Catholicism.  He  maintains,  in 
opposition  to  the  favorite  modern  notion  of  persecution 
defeating  its  own  object,  that  the  Church,  holding  the  dogma 
of  exclusive  salvation,  was  perfectly  consequent,  and  really 
achieved  its  end  of  spreading  one  belief  and  quenching 
another  by  calling  in  the  aid  of  the  civil  arm.  Who  will 
say  that  governments,  by  their  power  over  institutions  and 
patronage,  as  well  as  over  punishment,  have  not  power  also 
over  the  interests  and  inclinations  of  men,  and  over  most  of 
those  external  conditions  into  which  subjects  are  born,  and 
which  make  them  adopt  the  prevalent  belief  as  a  second 
nature?  Hence,  to  a  sincere  believer  in  the  doctrine  of 
exclusive  salvation,  governments  had  it  in  their  power  to 


LECKY'S  HISTORY. 


12'/ 


save  men  from  perdition ;  and  wherever  the  clergy  were  at 
the  elbow  of  the  civil  arm,  no  matter  whether  they  were 
Catholic  or  Protestant,  persecution  was  the  result.  ''Com- 
pel them  to  come  in"  was  a  rule  that  seemed  sanctioned  by 
mercy,  and  the  horrible  sufferings  it  led  men  to  inflict 
seemed  small  to  minds  accustomed  to  contemplate,  as  a 
perpetual  source  of  motive,  the  eternal  unmitigated  miseries 
of  a  hell  that  was  the  inevitable  destination  of  a  majority 
among  mankind. 

It  is  a  significant  fact,  noted  by  Mr.  Lecky,  that  the  only 
two  leaders  of  the  Reformation  who  advocated  tolerance, 
were  Zumglius  and  Socinus,  both  of  them  disbelievers  in 
exclusive  salvation.  And  in  corroboration  of  other  evi- 
dence that  the  chief  triumphs  of  the  Reformation  were  due 
to  coercion,  he  commends  to  the  special  attention  of  his 
readers  the  following  quotation  from  a  work  attributed 
without  question  to  the  famous  Protestant  theologian,  Jurieu, 
who  had  himself  been  hindered,  as  a  Protestant,  from  exer- 
cising his  professional  functions  in  France,  and  was  settled 
as  pastor  at  Rotterdam.  It  should  be  remembered  that 
Jurieu's  labors  fell  in  the  latter  part  of  the  seventeenth  cen- 
tury and  in  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth,  and  that  he 
was  the  contemporary  of  Bayle,  with  whom  he  was  in  bitter 
controversial  hostility.  He  wrote,  then,  at  the  time  when 
there  was  a  warm  debate  on  the  question  of  Toleration  ;  and 
it  was  his  great  object  to  vindicate  himself  and  his  French 
fellow-Protestants  from  all  laxity  on  this  point; 

"  Peut-on  nier  que  le  paganisme  est  tombe  dans  le  monde  par 
r  autorite  des  empereurs  Romains  ?  On  peut  assurer  sans  temerite 
que  le  paganisme  seroit  encore  debout,  et  que  les  trois  quarts  de  1' 
Europe  seroient  encore  payens  si  Constantin  et  ses  successeurs 
n'avaient  employe  leur  autorite  pour  I'abolir.  Mais,  je  vous  prie,  de 
quelles  voies  Dieu  s'est-il  servi  dansces  derniers  siecles  pour  retablir  la 
veritable  religion  dans  I'Occident  ?  Les  rois  de  Suede,  ceux  de  Dane- 
marc  k,  ceux  d' Angle terre,  les  magistrals  souverains  de  Suisse,  des 
Pais  Bas,  des  villes  libres  d\4.llemagne,  les^, princes  electeurs,  et  autres 
princes  souverains  de  V empire,  n  ont-ils  pas  empioie  leur  autorite 
pour  abbattre  le  Papisme  ?  ' ' 

Indeed,  wherever  the  tremendous  alternative  of  everlasting 
torments  is  believed  in — believed  in  so  that  it  becomes  a 
motive  determining  the  life — not  only  persecution,  but  every 
other  form  of  severity  and  gloom  are  the  legitimate  conse- 
quences.   There  is  much  ready  declamation  in  these  da^s 


128 


THE  INFLUENCE  OF  RATIONALISM: 


against  the  spirit  of  asceticism  and  against  the  zeal  of  doc- 
trinal conversion  ;  but  surely  the  macerated  form  of  a  Saint 
Francis,  the  fierce  denunciations  of  a  Saint  Dominic,  the 
groans  and  prayerful  wrestlings  of  the  Puritan  who  seasoned 
his  bread  with  tears  and  made  all  pleasurable  sensation  sin, 
are  more  in  keeping  with  the  contemplation  of  unending 
anguish  as  the  destiny  of  a  vast  multitude  whose  nature  v/e 
share,  than  the  rubicund  cheerfulness  of  some  modern  divines, 
who  profess  to  unite  a  smiling  liberalism  with  a  well-bred 
and  tacit  but  unshaken  confidence  in  the  reality  of  the 
bottomless  pit.  But  in  fact,  as  Mr.  Lecky  maintains,  that 
awful  image,  with  its  group  of  associated  dogmas  concerning 
the  inherited  curse,  and  the  damnation  of  unbaptized  infants, 
of  heathens,  and  of  heretics,  has  passed  away  from  what  he 
is  fond  of  calling  "the  reaHzations"  of  Christendom.  These 
things  are  no  longer  the  objects  of  practical  belief.  They 
may  be  mourned  for  in  encycHcal  letters;  bishops  may  regret 
them ;  doctors  of  divinity  may  sign  testimonials  to  the  excel- 
lent character  of  these  decayed  beliefs ;  but  for  the  mass  of 
Christians  they  are  no  more  influential  than  unrepealed  but 
forgotten  statutes.  And  with  these  dogmas  has  melted  away 
the  strong  basis  for  the  defence  of  persecution.  No  man 
now  writes  eager  vindications  of  himself  and  his  colleagues 
from  the  suspicion  of  adhering  to  the  principle  of  toleration. 
And  this  momentous  change,  it  is  Mr.  Lecky's  object  to 
show,  is  due  to  that  concurrence  of  conditions  which  he  has 
chosen  to  call  "the  advance  of  the  Spirit  of  Rationalism." 

In  other  parts  of  his  work,  where  he  attempts  to  trace  the 
action  of  the  same  conditions  on  the  acceptance  of  miracles 
and  on  other  chief  phases  of  our  historical  development,  Mr. 
Lecky  has  laid  himself  open  to  considerable  criticism.  The 
chapters  on  the  Miracles  of  the  Church,  the  aesthetic, 
scientific,  and  moral  Development  of  Rationalism,  tlie 
Secularization  of  Politics,  and  the  Industrial  History  of 
Rationalism,  embrace  a  wide  range  of  diligently  gathered 
facts  ;  but  they  are  nowhere  illuminated  by  a  sufficiently 
clear  conception  and  statement  of  the  agencies  at  work,  or 
the  mode  of  their  action,  in  the  gradual  modification  of 
opinion  and  of  life.  The  writer  frequently  impresses  us  as 
being  in  a  state  of  hesitation  concerning  his  own  standing- 
point,  which  may  form  a  desirable  stage  in  private  meditation, 
but  not  in  published  exposition.    Certain  epochs  in  theoretic 


LECKY'S  HISTORY. 


1-29 


conception,  certain  considerations,  which  should  be  funda- 
mental to  his  survey,  are  introduced  quite  incidentally  in  a 
sentence  or  two,  or  in  a  note  which  seems  to  be  an  after- 
thought. Great  writers  and  their  ideas  are  touched  upon 
too  slightly  and  with  too  little  discrimination,  and  important 
theories  are  sometimes  characterized  with  a  rashness  which 
conscientious  revision  will  correct.  There  is  a  fatiguing  use 
of  vague  or  shifting  phrases,  such  as  "modern  civilization," 
spirit  of  the  age,"  "tone  of  thought,"  "intellectual  type  of 
the  age,"  "bias  of  the  imagination,"  "habits  of  religious 
thought,"  unbalanced  by  any  precise  definition;  and  the 
spirit  of  rationalism  is  sometimes  treated  of  as  if  it  lay  out- 
side the  specific  mental  activities  of  which  it  is  a  generalized 
expression.  Mr.  Curdle's  famous  definition  of  the  dramatic 
unities  as  "a  sort  of  a  general  oneness"  is  not  totally  false; 
but  such  luminousness  as  it  has  could  only  be  perceived  by 
those  who  already  knew  what  the  unities  were.  Mr.  Lecky 
has  the  advantage  of  being  strongly  impressed  with  the  great 
part  played  by  the  emotions  in  the  formation  of  opinion, 
and  with  the  high  complexity  of  the  causes  at  work  in  social 
evolution;  but  he  frequently  writes  as  if  he  had  never  yet 
distinguished  between  the  complexity  of  the  conditions  that 
produce  prevalent  states  of  mind,  and  the  inability  of  particu- 
lar minds  to  give  distinct  reasons  for  the  preferences  or 
persuasions  produced  by  those  states.  In  brief,  he  does  not 
discriminate,  or  does  not  help  his  reader  to  discriminate, 
between  objective  complexity  and  subjective  confusion.  But 
the  most  muddle-headed  gentleman  who  represents  the  spirit 
of  the  age  by  observing,  as  he  settled  his  collar,  that  the 
development  theory  is  quite  "the  thing,'*  is  a  result  of  definite 
processes,  if  we  could  only  trace  them.  "  Mental  attitudes" 
and  "predispositions,"  however  vague  in  consciousness,  have 
not  vague  causes,  any  more  than  the  "blind  motions  of  the 
spring"  in  plants  and  animals. 

The  word  "Rationalism"  has  the  misfortune,  shared  by 
most  words  in  this  gray  world,  of  being  somewhat  equivocal. 
This  evil  may  be  nearly  overcome  by  careful  preliminary 
definition ;  but  Mr.  Lecky  does  not  supply  this,  and  the  orig- 
inal specific  application  of  the  word  to  a  particular  phrase  of 
Biblical  interpretation  seems  to  have  clung  about  his  use  of 
it  with  a  misleading  effect.  Through  some  parts  of  his  book 
he  appears  to  regard  the  grand  characteristic  of  modem 
Essays— 5, 


130    THE  NA  TURAL  HIS  TOR  V  OF  GERMAN  LIFE, 


thought  and  civilization,  compared  with  ancient,  as  a  radia- 
tion in  the  first  instance  from  a  change  in  reHgious  concep- 
tions. The  supremely  important  fact,  that  the  gradual  reduc- 
tion of  all  phenomena  within  the  sphere  of  established  law, 
which  carries  as  a  consequence  the  rejection  of  the  miracu- 
lous, has  its  determining  current  in  the  development  of 
physical  science,  seems  to  have  engaged  comparatively  little 
of  his  attention;  at  least,  he  gives  it  no  prominence.  The 
great  conception  of  universal  regular  sequence,  without  par- 
tiality and  Avithout  caprice — the  conception  which  is  the 
most  potent  force  at  work  in  the  modification  of  our  faith, 
and  of  the  practical  form  given  to  our  sentiments — could 
only  grow  out  of  that  patient  watching  of  external  fact,  and 
that  silencing  of  preconceived  notions,  which  are  urged  upon 
the  mind  by  the  problems  of  physical  science. 


THE  NATURAL  HISTORY  OF  GERMAN  LIFE : 

RIEHL. 


It  is  an  interesting  branch  of  psychological  observation  to 
'^ote  the  images  that  are  habitually  associated  with  abstract 
or  collective  terms — what  may  be  called  the  picture-writing 
of  the  mind,  which  it  carries  on  concurrently  with  the  more 
subtile  symbolism  of  language.  Perhaps  the  fixity  or  var- 
iety of  these  associated  images  would  furnish  a  tolerably  fair 
test  of  the  amount  of  concrete  knowledge  and  experience 
which  a  given  word  represents,  in  the  minds  of  two  persons 
who  use  it  with  equal  familiarity.  The  word  railways,  for 
example,  will  probably  call  up,  in  the  mind  of  a  man  who  is 
not  highly  locomotive,  the  image  either  of  a  Bradshaw," 
or  of  the  station  with  which  he  is  most  familiar,  or  of  an 
indefinite  length  of  tram-road  ;  he  will  alternate  between 
these  three  images,  which  represent  his  stock  of  concrete 
acquaintance  with  railways.  But  suppose  a  man  to  have  had 
successively  the  experience  of  a  ''navvy,"  an  engineer,  a 
traveller,  a  railway  director  and  shareholder,  and  a  landed 


RIEHL. 


proprietor  in  treaty  with  a  railway  company,  and  it  is  proba- 
ble that  the  range  of  images  which  would  by  turns  present 
themselves  to  his  mind  at  the  mention  of  the  Wd?r<^  "rail- 
ways" would  include  all  the  essential  facts  in  the  existence 
and  relations  of  the  thing.  Now  it  is  possible  for  the  first- 
mentioned  personage  to  entertain  very  expanded  views  as  to 
the  multiplication  of  railways  in  the  abstract,  and  their  ulti- 
mate function  in  civilization.  He  may  talk  of  a  vast  net- 
work of  railways  stretching  over  the  globe,  of  future  "lines" 
in  Madagascar,  and  elegant  refreshment-rooms  in  the  Sand- 
wich Islands,  with  none  the  less  glibness  because  his  distinct 
conceptions  on  the  subject  do  not  extend  beyond  his  one 
station  and  his  indefinite  length  of  tram-road.  But  it  is  evident 
that  if  we  want  a  railway  to  be  made,  or  its  affairs  to  be  man- 
aged, this  man  of  wide  views  and  narrow  observation  will 
not  serve  our  purpose.  i 

Probably,  if  we  could  ascertain  the  images  called  up  by 
the  terms  "the  people,"  "the  masses,"  "the  proletariat," 
"the  peasantry,"  by  many  who  theorize  on  those  bodies 
with  eloquence,  or  who  legislate  for  them  without  elo- 
quence, we  should  find  that  they  indicate  almost  as 
small  an  amount  of  concrete  knowledge — that  they  are  as 
far  from  completely  representing  the  complex  facts  summed 
up  in  the  collective  term,  as  the  railway  images  of  our  non- 
locomotive  gentleman.  How  little  the  real  characteristics 
of  the  working  classes  are  known  to  those  who  are  outside 
them,  how  little  their  natural  history  has  been  studied,  is 
sufficiently  disclosed  by  our  art  as  well  as  by  our  political 
and  social  theories.  Where,  in  our  picture  exhibitions, 
shall  we  find  a  group  of  true  peasantry?  What  English 
artist  even  attempts  to  rival  in  truthfulness  such  studies  of 
popular  life  as  the  pictures  of  Teniers  or  the  ragged  boys  of 
Murillo  ?  Even  one  of  the  greatest  painters  of  the  pre-emin- 
ently reahstic  school,  while,  in  his  picture  of  "The  Hireling 
Shepherd,"  he  gave  us  a  landscape  of  marvellous  truthful- 
ness, placed  a  pair  of  peasants  in  the  foreground  who  were 
not  much  more  real  than  the  idyllic  swains  and  damsels  of 
our  chimney  ornam'ents.  Only  a  total  absence  of  aquaint- 
ance  and  sympathy  with  our  peasantry  could  give  a  mom- 
ent's popularity  to  such  a  picture  as  "  Cross  Purposes," 
where  we  have  a  peasant  girl  who  looks  as  if  she  knew  L. 
E.  L.'s  poems  by  heart,  and  English  rustics,  whose  costume 


132    THE  NA  TURAL  HISTOR  V  OF  GERMAN  LIFE : 


seenls  to  indicate  that  they  are  meant  for  ploughmen,  with 
exotic  features  that  remind  us  of  a  handsome  prinio  tenore. 
Rather  than  such  Cockney  sentimentab'ty  as  this,  as  an 
education  for  the  taste  and  sympathies,  we  prefer  the  most 
crapulous  group  of  boors  that  Teniers  ever  painted.  But 
even  those  among  our  painters  who  aim  at  giving  the  rustic 
type  of  features,  who  are  far  above  the  efifen^inate  feebleness 
of  the  "  Keepsake''  style,  treat  their  subjects  under  the 
influence  of  traditions  and  prepossessions  rather  than  of 
direct  observation.  The  notion  that  peasants  are  joyous, 
that  the  typical  moment  to  represent  a  man  in  a  smock-frock 
is  when  he  is  cracking  a  joke  and  showing  a  row  of  sound 
teeth,  that  cottage  matrons  are  usually  buxom,  and  village 
children  necessarily  rosy  and  merry,  are  prejudices  difficult 
to  dislodge  from  the  artistic  mind,  which  looks  for  its  sub- 
jects into  literature  instead  of  life.  The  painter  is  still  under 
the  influence  of  idyllic  literature,  which  has  always  expressed 
the  imagination  of  the  cultivated  and  townbred,  rather  than 
the  truth  of  rustic  life.  Idyllic  ploughmen  are  jocund  when 
they  drive  their  team  afield ;  idyllic  shepherds  make  bashful 
love  under  hawthorn-bushes  ;  idyllic  villagers  dance  in  the 
chequered  shade  and  refresh  themselves,  not  immoderately, 
with  spicy  nut-brown  ale.  But  no  one  who  has  seen  much 
of  actual  ploughmen  thinks  them  jocund ;  no  one  who  is 
well  acquainted  with  the  English  peasantry  can  pronounce 
them  merry.  The  slow  gaze,  m  which  no  sense  of  beauty 
beams,  no  humor  twinkles,  the  slow  utterance,  and  the 
heavy,  slouching  walk,  remind  one  rather  of  that  melancholy 
animal  the  camel,  than  of  the  sturdy  countryman,  with 
striped  stockings,  red  waistcoat,  and  hat  aside,  who  repre- 
sents the  traditional  English  peasant.  Observe  a  company 
of  haymakers.  When  you  see  them  at  a  distance,  tossing 
up  the  forkfuls  of  hay  in  the  golden  light,  while  the  wagon 
creeps  slowly  with  its  increasing  burden  over  the  meadow, 
and  tlie  bright  green  space  which  tells  of  work  done  gets 
larger  and  larger,  you  pronounce  the  scene  "smiling,"  and 
you  think  these  companions  in  labor  must  be  as  bright  and 
cheerful  as  the  picture  to  which  they  give  animation. 
Approach  nearer,  and  you  will  certainly  find  that  haymak- 
ing-time is  a  time  for  joking,  especially  if  there  are  women 
among  the  laborers ;  but  the  coarse  laugh  that  bursts  out 
every  now  and  then,  and  expresses  the  triumphant  taunt,  is 


RJEHL. 


133 


as  far  as  possible  from  your  conception  of  idyllic  merriment. 
That  delicious  effervescence  of  the  mind  which  we  call  fun, 
has  no  equivalent  for  the  northern  peasant,  except  tipsy 
revelry;  the  only  realm  of  fancy  and  imagination  for  the 
English  clown  exists  at  the  bottom  of  the  third  quart-pot. 

The  conventional  countryman  of  the  stage,  who  picks  up 
pocket-books  and  never  looks  into  them,  and  who  is  too  sim- 
ple even  to  know  that  honesty  has  its  opposite,  represents 
the  still  lingering  mistake  that  an  unintelligible  dialect  is  a 
guarantee  for  ingenuousness,  and  that  slouching  shoulders 
indicate  an  upright  disposition.  It  is  quite  true  that  a  thresher 
is  Hkely  to  be  innocent  of  any  adroit  arithmetical  cheating, 
but  he  is  not  the  less  likely  to  carry  home  his  master's  corn 
in  his  shoes  and  pocket ;  a  reaper  is  not  given  to  writing  beg- 
ging-letters, but  he  is  quite  capable  of  cajoling  the  dairymaid 
into  filling  his  small-beer  bottle  witli  ale.  The  selfish 
instincts  are  not  s.ubdued  by  the  sight  oi  buttercups,  nor  is 
integrity  in  the  least  established  by  that  classic  rural  occu- 
pation, sheep-washing.  To  make  men  moral,  something 
more  is  requisite  than  to  turn  them  out  to  grass. 

Opera  peasants,  whose  unreality  excites  Mr.  Ruskin's 
indignation,  are  surely  too  frank  an  idealization  to  be  mislead- 
ing; and  since  popular  chorus  is  one  of  the  most  effective 
elements  of  the  opera,  we  can  hardly  object  to  lyric  rustics 
in  elegant  laced  bodices  and  picturesque  motley,  unless  we 
are  prepared  to  advocate  a  chorus  of  colliers  in  their  pit  cos- 
tume, or  a  ballet  of  charwomen  and  stocking-weavers.  But 
our  social  novels  profess  to  represent  the  people  as  they  are, 
and  the  unreality  of  their  representations  is  a  grave  evil. 
The  greatest  benefit  we  owe  to  the  artist,  whether  painter, 
poet,  or  novelist,  is  the  extension  of  our  sympathies.  Appeals 
founded  on  generalizations  and  statistics  require  a  sympathy 
ready-made,  a  moral  sentiment  already  in  activity;  but  a  pic- 
ture of  human  life  such  as  a  great  artist  can  give,  surprises 
even  the  trivial  and  the  selfish  into  that  attention  to  what  is 
apart  from  themselves,  which  may  be  called  the  raw  material 
of  moral  sentiment.  When  Scott  takes  us  into  Luckie 
Mucklebackit's  cottage,  or  tells  the  story  of  "  The  Two  Drov- 
ers," when  Wordsworth  sings  to  us  the  revery  of  ''Poor 
Susan,"  when  Kingsley  shows  us  Alton  Locke  gazing  yearn- 
ingly over  the  gate  which  leads  from  the  highway  into  thd 
first  wood  he  ever  saw,  when  Hornung  paints  a  group  of 


134    THE  NATURAL  HISTORY  OF  GERMAN  LIFE: 


chimney-sweepers — more  is  done  towards  linking  the  higher 
classes  with  the  lower,  towards  obliterating  the  vulgarity  of 
exclusiveness,  than  by  hundreds  of  sermons  and  philosophical 
dissertations.  Art  is  the  nearest  thing  to  life;  it  is  a  mode 
of  amplifying  experience  and  extending  our  contact  with  our 
fellow-men  beyond  the  bounds  of  our  personal  lot.  All  the 
more  sacred  is  the  task  of  the  artist  when  he  undertakes  to 
paint  the  life  of  the  People.  Falsification  here  is  far  more 
pernicious  than  in  the  more  artificial  aspects  of  life.  It  is 
not  so  very  serious  that  we  should  have  false  ideas  about 
evanescent  fashions — about  the  manners  and  conversation  of 
beaux  and  duchesses;  but  it  is  serious  that  our  sympathy 
with  the  perennial  joys  and  struggles,  the  toil,  the  tragedy, 
and  the  humor  in  the  life  of  our  more  heavily  laden  fellow- 
men,  should  be .  perverted,  and  turned  towards  a  false  object 
instead  of  the  true  one. 

This  perversion  is  not  the  less  fatal  because  the  misrepre- 
sentation which  gives  rise  to  it  has  what  the  artist  considers 
a  moral  end.  The  thing  for  mankind  to  know  is,  not  what 
are  the  motives  and  influences  which  the  moralist  thinks 
ought  to  act  on  the  laborer  or  the  artisan,  but  what  are  the 
motives  and  influences  which  do  act  on  him.  We  want  to 
be  taught  to  feel,  not  for  the  heroic  artisan  or  the  sentimen- 
tal peasant,  but  for  the  peasant  in  all  his  coarse  apathy,  and 
the  artisan  in  all  his  suspicious  selfishness. 

We  have  one  great  novelist  who  is  gifted  with  the  utmost 
power  of  rendering  the  external  traits  of  our  town  popula- 
tion ;  and  if  he  could  give  us  their  psychological  character — 
their  conceptions  of  Hfe,  and  their  emotions — with  the  same 
truth  as  their  idiom  and  manners,  his  books  would  be  the 
greatest  contribution  art  has  ever  made  to  the  awakening  of 
social  sympathies.  But  while  he  can  copy  Mrs.  Plornish's 
colloquial  style  with  the  delicate  accuracy  of  a  sun-picture, 
while  there  is  the  same  startling  inspiration  in  his  descrip- 
tion of  the  gestures  and  phrases  of  "  Boots,"  as  in  the 
speeches  of  Shakespeare's  mobs  or  numbskulls,  he  scarcely 
ever  passes  from  the  humorous  and  external  to  the  emotional 
and  tragic,  without  becoming  as  transcendent  in  his  unreality 
as  he  was  a  moment  before  in  his  artistic  truthfulness.  But 
for  the  precious  salt  of  his  humor,  which  compels  him  to 
reproduce  external  traits  that  serve,  in  some  degree,  as  a  cor- 
rective to  his  frequently  false  psychology,  his  preternaturally 


RIEHL. 


virtuous  poor  children  and  artisans,  his  melodramatic  boat- 
men and  courtesans,  would  be  as  noxious  as  Eugene  Sue's 
idealized  proletaires  in  encouraging  the  miserable  fallacy  that 
high  morality  and  refined  sentiment  can  grow  out  of  harsh 
social  relations,  ignorance,  and  want ;  or  that  the  working- 
classes  are  in  a  condition  to  enter  at  once  into  a  millennial 
state  of  altruism,  wherein  every  one  is  caring  for  every  one 
else,  and  no  one  for  himself. 

If  we  need  a  true  conception  of  the  popular  character  to 
guide  our  sympathies  rightly,  we  need  it  equally  to  check 
our  theories,  and  direct  us  in  their  application.  The  ten- 
dency created  by  the  splendid  conquests  of  modern  general- 
ization, to  believe  that  all  social  questions  are  merged  in 
economical  science,  and  that  the  relations  of  men  to  their 
neighbors  may  be  settled  by  algebraic  equations,  the  dream 
that  the  uncultured  classes  are  prepared  for  a  condition  which 
appeals  principally  to  their  moral  sensibilities  ;  the  aristo- 
cratic dilettanteism  which  attempts  to  restore  "  the  good 
old  times"  by  a  sort  of  idyllic  masquerading,  and  to  grow 
feudal  fidelity  and  veneration  as  we  grow  prize  turnips,  by  an 
artificial  system  of  culture,  none  of  these  diverging  mistakes 
can  coexist  with  a  real  knowledge  of  the  people,  with  a  thor- 
ough study  of  their  habits,  their  ideas,  their  motives.  The 
landholder,  the  clergyman,  the  mill-owner,  the  mining-agent, 
have  each  an  opportunity  for  making  precious  observations 
on  different  sections  of  the  working-classes ;  but  unfortun- 
ately their  experience  is  too  often  not  registered  at  all,  or  its 
results  are  too  scattered  to  be  available  as  a  source  of  infor- 
mation and  stimulus  to  the  public  mind  generally.  If  any 
man  of  sufficient  moral  and  intellectual  breadth,  whose  obser- 
vations would  not  be  vitiated  by  a  foregone  conclusion,  or 
by  a  professional  point  of  view,  would  devote  himself  to 
studying  the  natural  history  of  our  social  classes,  especially 
of  the  small  shopkeepers,  artisans  and  peasantry,  the  degree 
in  which  they  are  influenced  by  local  conditions,  their  max- 
ims and  habits,  the  points  of  view  from  which  they  regard 
their  religious  teachers,  and  the  degree  in  which  they  are 
influenced  by  religious  doctrines,  the  interaction  of  the  vari- 
ous classes  on  each  other,  and  what  are  the  tendencies  in 
their  position  towards  disintegration  or  towards  develop- 
ment ;  and  if,  after  all  this  study,  he  would  give  us  the  result 
of  his  observations  in  a  book  well  nourished  with  specific 


136    THE  NATURAL  HISTORY  OF  GERM  A  A  LIFE 


facts,  his  work  would  be  a  valuable  aid  to  the  social  and  polit- 
ical reformer. 

What  we  are  desiring  for  ourselves  has  been  in  some 
degree  done  for  the  Germans  by  Riehl,  the  author  of  the 
very  remarkable  books  the  titles  of  which  are  placed  at  the 
bottom  of  this  page ;  *  and  we  wish  to  make  these  books 
known  to  our  readers,  not  only  for  the  sake  of  the  interest- 
ing matter  they  contain  and  the  important  reflections  they 
suggest,  but  also  as  a  model  for  some  future  or  actual  stu- 
dent of  our  own  people.  By  way  of  introducing  Riehl  to 
those  who  are  unacquainted  with  his  writings,  we  will  give 
a  rapid  sketch  from  his  picture  of  the  German  Peasantry, 
and  perhaps  this  indication  of  the  mode  in  which  he  treats 
a  particular  branch  of  his  subject  may  prepare  them  to  follow 
us  with  more  interest  when  we  enter  on  the  general  purpose 
and  contents  of  his  works. 

In  England,  at  present,  when  we  speak  of  the  peasantry, 
we  mean  scarcely  mbre  than  the  class  of  farm-servants  and 
farm-laborers;  and  it  is  only  in  the  most  primitive  districts — 
as  in  Wales,  for  example — that  farmers  are  included  under 
the  term.  In  order  to  appreciate  what  Riehl  says  of  the 
German  peasantry,  we  must  remember  what  the  tenant- 
farmers  and  small  proprietors  were  in  England  half  a  century 
ago,  when  the  master  helped  to  milk  his  own  cows,  and  the 
daughters  got  up  at  one  o'clock  in  the  morning  to  brew ; 
when  the  family  dined  in  the  kitchen  with  the  servants 
and  sat  with  them  round  the  kitchen  fire  in  the  evening. 
In  those  days,  the  quarried  parlor  was  innocent  of  a  car- 
pet, and  its  only  specimens  of  art  were  a  framed  sam- 
pler and  the  best  tea-board ;  the  daughters  even  of  sub- 
stantial farmers  had  often  no  greater  accomplishment  in 
writing  and  spelling  than  they  could  procure  at  a  dame- 
school;  and,  instead  of  carrying  on  sentimental  correspond- 
ence, they  were  spinning  their  future  table-linen,  and  look- 
ing after  every  saving  in  butter  and  eggs  that  might  enable- 
them  to  add  to  the  little  stock  of  plate  and  china  which  they 
were  laying  in  against  their  marriage.  In  our  own  day,  set- 
ting aside  the  superior  order  of  farmers,  whose  style  of  living 
and  mental  culture  are  often  equal  to  that  of  the  professional 

*"Z>z^  Biirgerliche  Gesellschaft,''  von  W.H.  Riehl.  Dritte  Au- 
flage,  1855.  ' 

"  Land  und  Leule,"  von  W.  H.  Riehl,    Dritte  Auflage,  1856. 


RIEHL 


cla<>s  in  provincial  towns,  we  can  hardly  enter  the  least 
innposing  farm-house  without  finding  a  bad  piano  in  the 
"drawing-room,"  and  some  old  annuals,  disposed  with  a 
symmetrical  imitation  of  negligence,  on  the  table;  though 
the  daughters  may  still  drop  their  ^'s,  their  vowels  are 
studiously  narrow;  and  it  is  only  in  very  primitive  regions 
that  they  will  consent  to  sit  in  a  covered  vehicle  without 
springs,  which  was  once  thought  an  advance  in  luxury  on 
the  pillion. 

The  condition  of  the  tenant-farmers  and  small  proprietors 
in  Germany  is,  we  imagine,  about  on  a  par — not,  certainly,  in 
material  prosperity,  but  in  mental  culture  and  habits — with 
that  of  the  old  English  farmers  who  were  beginning  to  be 
thought  old-fashioned  nearly  fifty  years  ago ;  and  if  we  add 
to  these  the  farm  servants  and  laborers,  we  shall  have  a  class 
approximating  in  its  characteristics  to  the  Bauernthiirn,  or 
peasantry,  described  by  Riehl. 

In  Germany,  perhaps  more  than  in  any  other  country, 
it  is  among  the  peasantry  that  we  must  look  for  the  histori- 
cal type  of  the  national  physique.  In  the  towns  this  type 
has  become  so  modified  to  express  the  personality  of  the 
individual,  that  even  "family  likeness"  is  often  but  faintly 
marked.  But  the  peasants  may  still  be  distinguished  into 
groups  by  their  physical  peculiarities.  In  one  part  of  the 
country  we  find  a  longer-legged,  in  another  a  broader-should- 
ered race,  which  has  inherited  these  peculiarities  for  centuries. 
For  example,  in  certain  districts  of  Hesse  are  seen  long 
faces,  with  high  foreheads,  long,  straight  noses,  and  small  eyes 
with  arched  eyebrows  and  large  eyelids.  On  comparing 
these  physiognomies  with  the  sculptures  in  the  church  of  St. 
Klizabeth,  at  Marburg,  executed  in  the  thirteenth  century,  it 
will  be  found  that  the  same  old  Hessian  type  of  face  has  sub- 
sisted unchanged,  with  this  distinction  only,  that  the  sculp- 
tures represent  princes  and  nobles,  whose  features  then  bore 
\hQ  stamp  of  their  race,  while  that  stamp  is  now  to  be  found 
'>ij1y  among  the  peasants.  A  painter  who  wants  to  draw 
medieval  characters  with  historic  truth  must  seek  his 
mod(^ls  among  the  peasantry.  This  explains  why  the  old 
German  painters  gave  the  heads  of  their  subjects  a  greater 
uniformity  of  type  than  the  painters  of  our  day ;  the  race  had 
not  attained  to  a  high  degree  of  individualization  in  features 
and  expression.  -  It  indicates,  too,  that  the  cultured  man 


138    THE  NATURAL  HISTORY  OF  GERMAN  LIFE : 


acts  more  as  an  individual ;  the  peasant,  more  as  one  of  a 
group.  Hans  drives  the  plough,  lives,  and  thinks  just  as 
Kunz  does ;  and  it  is  this  fact,  that  many  thousands  of  men 
are  as  like  each  other  in  thoughts  and  habits  as  so  many 
sheep  or  oysters,  which  constitutes  the  weight  of  the  peas- 
antry in  the  social  and  political  scale. 

In  the  cultivated  world  each  individual  has  his  style  of 
speaking  and  writing.  But  -among  the  peasantry  it  is  the 
race,  the  district,  the  province,  that  has  its  style — namely, 
its  dialect,  its  phraseology,  its  proverbs,  and  its  songs,  which 
belong  alike  to  the  entire  body  of  the  people.  This  provin- 
cial style  of  the  peasant  is  again,  like  his  physique,  a  remnant 
of  history  to  which  he  clings  with  the  utmost  tenacity.  In 
certain  parts  of  Hungary  there  are  still  descendants  of  Ger- 
man colonists  of  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries,  who 
go  about  the  country  as  reapers,  retaining  their  old  Saxon 
songs  and  manners,  while  the  more  cultivated  German  emi- 
grants in  a  very  short  time  forget  their  own  language,  and 
speak  Hungarian.  Another  remarkable  case  of  the  same 
kind  is  that  of  the  "Wends,  a  Sclavonic  race  settled  in  Lusa- 
tia,  whose  numbers  amount  to  200,000,  living  either  scat- 
tered among  the  German  population  or  in  separate  parishes. 
They  have  their  own  schools  and  churches,  and  are  taught 
in  the  Sclavonic  tongue.  The  Catholics  among  them  are 
rigid  adherents  of  the  Pope ;  the  Protestants  are  not  less 
rigid  adherents  of  Luther,  or  Doctor  Luther,  as  they  are 
particular  in  calling  him — a  custom  which,  a  hundred  years 
ago,  was  universal  in  Protestant  Germany.  The  Wend 
clings  tenaciously  to  the  usages  of  his  Church,  and  perhaps 
this  may  contribute  not  a  little  to  the  purity  in  which  he 
maintains  the  specific  characteristics  of  his  race.  German 
education,  German  law  and  government,  service  in  the  stand- 
ing army,  and  many  other  agencies,  are  in  antagonism  to  his 
natural  exclusiveness;  but  the  wives  and  mothers  here,  as 
elsewhere,  are  a  conservative  influence,  and  the  habits  tempor- 
arily laid  aside  in  the  outer  world  are  recovered  by  the  fire- 
side. The  Wends  form  several  stout  regiments  in  the  Saxon 
army ;  they  are  sought  far  and  wide  as  diligent  and  honest 
servants ;  and  many  a  weakly  Dresden  or  Leipzig  child 
becomes  thriving  under  the  care  of  a  Wendish  nurse.  In 
their  villages  they  have  the  air  and  habits  of  genuine,  sturdy 
peasants,  and  all  their  customs  indicate  that  they  have  been, 


RIEHL. 


T39 


from  the  first,  an  agricultural  people.  For  example,  they 
have  traditional  modes  of  treating  their  domestic  animals. 
Each  cow  has  its  own  name,  generally  chosen  carefully,  so 
as  to  express  the  special  qualities  of  the  animal ;  and  all 
important  family  events  are  narrated  to  the  bees — a  custom 
which  is  found  also  in  Westphalia.  Whether  by  the  help  of 
the  bees  or  not,  the  Wend  farming  is  especially  prosperous ; 
and  when  a  poor  Bohemian  peasant  has  a  son  born  to  him, 
he  binds  him  to  the  end  of  a  long  pole  and  turns  his  face 
towards  Lusatia,  that  he  may  be  as  lucky  as  the  Wends 
who  live  there. 

The  peculiarity  of  the  peasant's  language  consists  chiefly 
in  his  retention  of  historical  peculiarities,  which  gradually 
disappear  under  the  friction  of  cultivated  circles.  He  pre- 
fers any  proper  name  that  may  be  given  to  a  day  in  the 
calendar  rather  than  the  abstract  date,  by  which  he  very 
rarely  reckons.  In  the  baptismal  names  of  his  children  he 
is  guided  by  the  old  custom  of  the  country,  not  at  all  by 
whim  and  fancy.  Many  old  baptismal  names,  formerly  com- 
mon in  Germany,  would  have  become  extinct  but  for  their 
preservation  among  the  peasantry,  especially  in  North  Ger- 
many ;  and  so  firmly  have  they  adhered  to  local  tradition  in 
this  matter  that  it  would  be  possible  to  give  a  sort  of  topo- 
graphical statistics  of  proper  names,  and  distinguish  a  dis- 
trict by  its  rustic  names  as  we  do  by  its  flora  and  fauna. 
The  continuous  inheritance  of  certain  favorite  proper  names 
in  a  family,  in  some  districts,  forces  the  peasant  to  adopt 
the  princely  custom  of  attaching  a  numeral  to  the  name,  and 
saying,  when  three  generations  are  Hving  at  once,  Hans  I., 
II.,  and  III,;  or,  in  the  more  antique,  fashion,  Hans  the 
elder,  the  middle,  and  the  younger.  In  some  of  our  English 
counties  there  is  a  similar  adherence  to  a  narrow  range  of 
proper  names;  and  as  a  mode  of  distinguishing  collateral 
branches  in  the  same  family,  you  will  hear  of  Jonathan's 
Bess,  Thomas's  Bess,  and  Samuel's  Bess — the  three  Bessies 
being  cousins. 

The  peasant's  adherence  to  the  traditional  has  much 
greater  inconvenience  than  that  entailed  by  a  paucity  of 
proper  names.  In  the  Black  Forest  and  in  Huttenberg  you 
will  see  him  in  the  dog-days  wearing  a  thick  fur  cap,  because 
it  is  an  historical  fur  cap — a  cap  worn  by  his  grandfather. 
In  the  Wetterau,  that  peasant  girl  is  considered  the  hand- 


I40    THE  NA  TURAL  HISTOR  V  OF  GERMAN  LIFE: 

somest  who  wears  the  most  petticoats.  To  go  to  field-labor 
in  seven  petticoats  can  be  anything  but  convenient  or  agree- 
able, but  it  is  the  traditionally  correct  thing ;  and  a  German 
peasant  girl  would  think  herself  as  unfavorably  conspicuous 
in  an  untraditional  costume  as  an  English  servant  girl  would 
now  think  herself  in  a  "linsey-woolsey"  apron  or  a  thick 
mushn  cap.  In  many-  districts  no  medical  advice  would 
induce  the  rustic  to  renounce  the  tight  leather  belt  with 
which  he  injures  his  digestive  functions ;  you  could  more 
easily  persuade  him  to  smile  on  a  new  communal  system 
than  on  the  unhistorical  invention  of  braces.  In  the  eigh- 
teenth century,  in  spite  of  the  philanthropic  preachers  of 
potatoes,  the  peasant  for  years  threw  his  potatoes  to  the  pigs 
and  the  dogs,  before  he  could  be  persuaded  to  put  them  on 
his  own  table.  However,  the  unwillingness  of  the  peasant 
to  adopt  innovations  has  a  not  unreasonable  foundation  >in 
the  fact  that  for  him  experiments  are  practical,  not  theo- 
retical, and  must  be  made  with  expense  of  money  instead 
of  brains — a  fact  that  is  not,  perhaps,  sufficiently  taken  into 
account  by  agricultural  theorists,  who  complain  of  the  farm- 
er's obstinacy.  The  peasant  has  the  smallest  possible  faith 
in  theoretic  knowledge ;  he  thinks  it  rather  dangerous  than 
otherwise,  as  is  well  indicated  by  a  Lower  Rhenish  proverb : 
''One  is  never  too  old  to  learn,  said  an  old  woman;  so  she 
learned  to  be  a  witch." 

Between  many  villages  an  historical  feud — once,  perhaps, 
the  occasion  of  much  bloodshed — is  still  kept  up  under  the 
milder  form  of  an  occasional  round  of  cudgelling,  and  the 
launching  of  traditional  nicknames.  An  historical  feud  of 
this  kind  still  exists,  for  example,  among  many  villages  on 
the  Rhine  and  more  inland  places  in  the  neighborhood. 
Rheinschnacke  {oi  which  the  equivalent  is,  perhaps,  ''water- 
snake")  is  the  standing  term  of  ignominy  for  the  inhabitant 
of  the  Rhine  village,  who  repays  it  in  kind  by  the  epithet 
'^karsf  (mattock or  ''kitkuk''  (cuckoo),  according  as  the 
object  of  nis  hereditary  hatred  belongs  to  the  field  or  the 
forest.  If  any  Romeo  among  the  "  mattocks  "  were  to  marry 
a  Juliet  among  the  "  water-snakes,"  there  would  be  no  lack 
of  Tybalts  and  Mercutios  to  carry  the  conflict  from  words  to 
blows,  though  neither  side  knows  a  reason  for  the  enmity. 

A  droll  instance  of  peasant  conservatism  is  told  of  a 
village  on  the  Taunus,  whose  inhabitants  from  time  immem- 


RIEHL. 


orial  had  been  famous  for  impromptu  cudgelling.  For  this 
historical  offence  the  magistrates  of  the  district  had  always 
inflicted  the  equally  historical  punishment  of  shutting  up  the 
most  incorrigible  offenders,  not  in  prison,  but  in  their  own 
pig-sty.  In  recent  times,  however,  the  government,  wish- 
ing to  correct  the  rudeness  of  these  peasants,  appointed  an 

enlightened"  man  as  magistrate,  who  at  once  abolished 
the  original  penalty  above  mentioned.  But  this  relaxation 
of  punishment  was  so  far  from  being  welcome  to  the  villa- 
gers that  they  presented  a  petition  praying  that  a  more 
energetic  man  might  be  given  them  as  a  magistrate,  who 
would  have  the  courage  to  punish  according  to  law  and  jus- 
tice,''as  had  been  beforetime."  And  the  magistrate  who 
abolished  incarceration  in  the  pig-sty  could  never  obtain  the 
respect  of  the  neighborhood.  This  happened  no  longer  ago 
than  the  beginning  of  the  present  century. 

But  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  the  historical  piety  of 
the  Germ^i  peasant  extends  to  anything  not  immediately 
connected  with  himself.  He  has  the  warmest  piety  towards 
the  old  tumble-down  house  which  his  grandfather  built,  and 
which  nothing  will  induce  him  to  improve ;  but  towards  the 
venerable  ruins  of  the  old  castle  that  overlooks  his  village 
he  has  no  piety  at  all,  and  carries  off  its  stones  to  make  a 
fence  for  his  garden,  or  tears  down  the  Gothic  carving  of 
the  old  monastic  church,  which  is  "nothing  to  him,''  to 
mark  off  a  footpath  through  his  field.  It  is  the  same  with 
historical  traditions.  The  peasant  has  them  fresh  in  his 
•memory,  so  far  as  they  relate  to  himself.  In  districts  where 
the  peasantry  are  unadulterated,  you  discern  the  remnants 
of  the  feudal  relations  in  innumerable  customs  and  phrases, 
but  you  will  ask  in  vain  for  historical  traditions  concerning 
the  empire,  or  even  concerning  the  particular  princely  house 
to  which  the  peasant  is  subject.  He  can  tell  you  what 
"half  people  and  whole  people"  mean;  in  Hesse  you  will 
still  hear  of  "four  horses  making  a  whole  peasant,"  or  of 
"four-day  and  three-day  peasants:  "  but  you  will  ask  in  vain 
about  Charlemagne  and  Frederic  Barbarossa. 

Riehl  well  observes  that  the  feudal  system,  which  made 
the  peasant  the  bondman  of  his  lord,  was  an  immense  bene- 
fit in  a  country  the  greater  part  of  A\  hich  had  still  to  be  col- 
onized— rescued  the  peasant  from  vagabondage,  and  laid  the 

foundation  of  persistency  and  endurance  in  future  generations. 


142    THE  NA  TURAL  HISTOR  Y  OF  GERMAN  LIFE: 

If  a  free  German  peasantry  belongs  only  to  modern  times,  it 
is  to  his  ancestor,  who  was  a  serf,  and  even,  in  the  earliest 
times,  a  slave,  that  the  peasant  owes  the  foundation  of  his 
independence;  namely,  his  capability  of  a  settled  existence 
— nay,  his  unreasoning  persistency,  which  has  its  important 
function  in  the  development  of  the  race. 

Perhaps  the  very  worst  result  of  that  unreasoning  persist- 
ency is  the  peasant's  inveterate  habit  of  litigation.  Every 
one  remembers  the  immortal  description  of  Dandie  Dinmont's 
importunate  application  to  Lawyer  Pleydell  to  manage  his 
"bit  lawsuit,"  till  at  length  Pleydell  consents  to  help  him 
ruin  himself,  on  the  ground  that  Dandie  may  fall  into  worse 
hands.  It  seems  this  is  a  scene  which  has  many  parallels  in 
Germany.  The  farmer's  lawsuit  is  his  point  of  honor;  and 
he  will  carry  it  through,  though  he  knows  from  the  very  first 
day  that  he  shall  get  nothing  by  it.  The  litigious  peasant 
piques  himself,  like  Mr.  Saddletree,  on  his  knowledge  of  the 
law,  and  this  vanity  is  the  chief  impulse  to  many  a  lawsuit. 
To  the  mind  of  the  peasant,  law  presents  itself  as  the  ''custom 
of  the  country,"  and  it  is  his  pride  to  be  versed  in  all  customs. 
Custom  with  him  holds  the  place  of  sentiment,  of  theory^  andy 
in  many  cases,  of  affection.  Riehl  justly  urges  the  importance 
of  simplifying  law  proceedings,  so  as  to  cut  off  this  vanity 
at  its  source,  and  also  of  encouraging,  by  every  possible 
means,  the  practice  of  arbitration. 

The  peasant  never  begins  his  lawsuit  in  summer,  for  the 
same  reason  that  he  does  not  make  love  and  marry  in  sum- 
mer— because  he  has  no  time  for  that  sort  of  thing.  Any-  * 
thing  is  easier  to  him  than  to  move  out  of  his  habitual 
course,  and  he  is  attached  even  to  his  privations.  Some 
years  ago,  a  peasant  youth,  out  of  the  poorest  and  remotest 
region  of  the  Westerwald,  was  enlisted  as  a  recruit,  at  Wiel- 
burg  in  Nassau.  The  lad  having  never  in  his  life  slept  in  a 
bed,  when  he  had  to  get  into  one  for  the  first  time  began  to. 
cry  like  a  child;  and  he  deserted  twice  because  he  could 
not  reconcile  himself  to  sleeping  in  a  bed,  and  to  the  "fine" 
life  of  the  barracks ;  he  was  homesick  at  the  thought  of  his 
accustomed  poverty  and  his  thatched  hut.  A  strong  con- 
trast this  with  the  feeling  of  the  poor  in  towns,  who  would 
be  far  enough  from  deserting  because  their  condition  was 
too  much  improved !  The  genuine  peasant  is  never  ashamed 
of  his  rank  and  calling;  he  is  rather  inclined  to  look  down 


RIEHL. 


on  every  one  who  does  not  wear  a  smock-frock,  and  thinks 
a  man  who  has  the  manners  of  the  gentry  is  likely  to  be 
rather  windy  and  unsubstantial.  In  some  places,  even  in 
French  districts,  this  feeling  is  strongly  symbolized  by  the 
practice  of  the  peasantry,  on  certain  festival  days,  to  dress 
the  images  of  the  saints  in  peasant's  clothing.  History  tells 
us  of  all  kinds  of  peasant  insurrections,  the  object  of  which 
was  to  obtain  relief  for  the  peasants  from  some  of  their  many 
oppressions ;  but  of  an  effort  on  their  part  to  step  out  of 
their  hereditary  rank  and  calling,  to  become  gentry,  to  leave 
the  plough  and  carry  on  the  easier  business  of  capitalists  or 
government  functionaries,  there  is  no  example. 

The  German  novelists  who  undertake  to  give  pictures  of 
peasant  life  fall  into  the  same  mistake  as  our  English  novel- 
ists; they  transfer  their  own  feelings  to  ploughmen  and 
woodcutters,  and  give  them  both  joys  and  sorrows  of 
which  they  know  nothing.  The  peasant  never  questions 
the  obligations  of  family  ties — he  questions  no  custom — but 
tender  affection,  as  it  exists  among  the  refined  part  of  man- 
kind, is  almost  as  foreign  to  him  as  white  hands  and  filbert- 
shaped  nails.  That  the  aged  father  who  has  given  up  his 
property  to  his  children  on  condition  of  their  maintaining 
him  for  the  remainder  of  his  life  is  very  far  from  meeting 
with  delicate  attentions,  is  indicated  by  the  proverb  current 
among  the  peasantry — "  Don't  take  your  clothes  off  before 
you  go  to  bed."*  Among  rustic  moral  tales  and  parables, 
not  one  is  more  universal  than  the  story  of  the  ungrateful 
children,  who  made  their  gray-headed  father,  dependent 
on  them  for  a  maintenance,  eat  at  a  wooden  trough  because 
he  shook  the  food  out  of  his  trembling  hands.  Then  these 
same  ungrateful  children  observed  one  day  that  their  own 
little  boy  was  making  a  tiny  wooden  trough  ;  and  when  they 
asked  him  what  it  was  for,  he  answered,  that  his  father  and 
mother  might  eat  out  of  it  when  he  was  a  man  and  had  to 
keep  them. 

Marriage  is  a  very  prudential  affair,  especially  among  the 
peasants  who  have  the  largest  share  of  property.  Politic 
marriages  are  as  common  among  them  as  among  princes ; 
and  when  a  peasant-heiress  in  Westphalia  marries,  her  hus- 
band adopts  her  name,  and  places  his  own  after  it  with  the  pre- 
fix geborner  (ne).    The  girls  marry  young,  and  the  rapidity 


*  This  proverb  is  common  among  the  English  farmers  also. 


144    THE  NATURAL  HISTORY  OF  GERMAN  LIFE: 


with  which  they  get  old  and  ugly  is  one  among  the  many 
proofs  that  the  early  years  of  marriage  are  fuller  of  hard- 
ships than  of  conjugal  tenderness.  "When  our  writers  of 
village  stories,"  says  Riehl,  "transferred  their  own  emo- 
tional life  to  the  peasant,  they  obliterated  what  is  precisely 
his  most  predominant  characteristic  ;  namely,  that  with  him 
general  custom  holds  the  place  of  individual  feeling." 

We  pay  for  greater  emotional  susceptibility  too  often  by 
nervous  diseases  of  which  the  peasant  knows  nothing.  To 
him  headache  is  the  least  of  physical  evils,  because  he  thinks 
head-work  the  easiest  and  least  indispensable  of  all  labor. 
Happily,  many  of  the  younger  sons  in  peasant  families,  by 
going  to  seek  their  living  in  the  towns,  carry  their  hardy 
nervous  system  to  amalgamate  with  the  over- wrought  nerves 
of  our  town  population,  and  refresh  them  with  a  little  rude 
vigor.  And  a  return  to  the  habits  of  peasant  life  is  the  best 
remedy  for  many  moral  as  well  as  physical  diseases  induced 
by  perverted  civilization.  Riehl  points  to  colonization  as 
presenting  the  true  field  for  this  regenerative  process.  On 
the  other  side  of  the  ocean  a  man  will  have  the  courage  to 
begin  life  again  as  a  peasant,  while  at  home,  perhaps,  oppor- 
tunity as  well  as  courage  will  fail  him.  A  propos  of  this 
subject  of  emigration,  he  remarks  the  striking  fact  that  the 
native  shrewdness  and  mother-wit  of  the  German  peasant 
seem  to  forsake  him  entirely  when  he  has  to  apply  them  under 
new  circumstances,  and  on  relations  foreign  to  his  experience. 
Hence  it  is  that  the  German  peasant  who  emigrates  so  con- 
stantly falls  a  victim  to  unprincipled  adventurers  in  the  pre- 
liminaries to  emigration ;  but  if  once  he  gets  his  foot  on  the 
American  soil,  he  exhibits  all  the  first  rate  qualities  of  an 
agricultural  colonist ;  and  among  all  German  emigrants  the 
peasant  class  are  the  most  successful. 

But  many  disintegrating  forces  have  been  at  work  on  the 
peasant  character,  and  degeneration  is  unhappily  going  on 
at  a  greater  pace  than  development.  In  the  wine  districts, 
especially,  the  inability  of  the  small  proprietors  to  bear  up 
under  the  vicissitudes  of  the  market,  or  to  insure  a  high  quahty 
of  wine  by  running  the  risks  of  a  late  vintage,  and  the  com- 
petition of  beer  and  cider  with  the  inferior  wines,  have  tended 
to  produce  that  uncertainty  of  gain  which,  with  the  peasant, 
is  the  inevitable  cause  of  demoralization.  The  small  peasant 
proprietors  are  not  a  new  class  in  Germany,  but  many  of  the 


RTEHL. 


145 


evils  of  their  position  are  new.  They  are  more  dependent 
on  ready  money  than  formerly ;  thus,  where  a  peasant  used 
to  get  his'wood  for  building  and  firing  from  the  common  for- 
est, he  has  now  to  pay  for  it  with  hard  cash  ;  he  used  to  thatch 
his  own  house,  with  the  help,  perhaps  of  a  neighbor,  but  now 
he  pays  a  man  to  do  it  for  him ;  he  used  to  pay  taxes  in  kind, 
he  now  pays  them  in  money.  The  chances  of  the  market 
have  to  be  discounted,  and  the  peasant  falls  into  the  hands 
of  money-lenders.  Here  is  one  of  the  cases  in  which  social 
policy  clashes  with  a  purely  economical  policy. 

Political  vicissitudes  have  added  their  influence  to  that  of 
economical  changes  in  disturbing  that  dim  instinct,  that  rev- 
erence for  traditional  custom,  which  is  the  peasant's  principle 
of  action.  He  is  in  the  midst  of  novelties  for  which  he  knows 
no  reason — changes  in  political  geography,  changes  of  the 
government  to  which  he  owes  fealty,  changes  in  bureaucratic 
management  and  police  regulations.  He  finds  himself  in  a 
new  element  before  an  apparatus  for  breathing  in  it  is  devel- 
oped in  him.  His  only  knowledge  of  modern  history  is  in 
some  of  its  results — for  instance,  that  he  has  to  pay  heavier 
taxes  from  year  to  year.  His  chief  idea  of  a  government  is 
of  a  power  that  raises  his  taxes,  opposes  his  harmless  customs, 
and  torments  him  with  new  formalities.  The  source  of  all 
this  is  the  false  system  of  enlightening"  the  peasant,  which 
has  been  adopted  by  the  bureaucratic  governments.  A  sys- 
tem which  disregards  the  traditions  and  hereditary  attach- 
ments of  the  peasant,  and  appeals  only  to  a  logical  under- 
standing which  is  not  yet  developed  in  him,  is  simply  disin- 
tegrating and  ruinous  to  the"  peasant  character.  The  inter- 
ference with  the  communal  regulations  has  been  of  this  fatal 
character.  Instead  of  endeavoring  to  promote  to  the  utmost 
the  healthy  Hfe  of  the  cummune,  as  an  organism  the  con- 
ditions of  which  are  bound  up  with  the  historical  character- 
istics of  the  peasant,  the  bureaucratic  plan  of  government 
is  bent  on  improvement  by  its  patent  machinery  of  state- 
appointed  functionaries,  and  off-hand  regulations  in  accord- 
ance with  modern  enlightenment.  The  spirit  of  communal 
exclusiveness — the  resistance  to  the  indiscriminate  estab- 
lishment of  strangers — is  an  intense  traditional  feeling  in  the 
peasant.  "This  gallows  is  for  us  artd  our  children,"  is  the 
typical  motto  of  this  spirit.  But  sucn  exclusiveness  is  highly 
irrational  and  repugnant  to  liberalism ;  therefore  a  bureau- 


146    THE  NA  TURAL  HISTOR  Y  OF  GERMAN  LIFE  : 


cratic  government  at  once  opposes  it,  and  encourages  to  the 
utmost  the  introduction  of  new  inhabitants  in  the  provincial 
communes.  Instead  of  allowing  the  peasants  to  manage 
their  own  affairs,  and,  if  they  happen  to  believe  that  five 
and  four  make  eleven,  to  unlearn  the  prejudice  by  their  own 
experience  in  calculation,  so  that  they  may  gradually  under- 
stand processes,  and  not  merely  see  results,  bureaucracy 
comes  with  its  Ready  Reckoner  "  and  works  all  the  peas- 
ant's sums  for  him — the  surest  way  of  maintaining  him  in 
his  stupidity,  however  it  may  shake  his  prejudice. 

Another  questionable  plan  for  elevating  the  peasant  is  the 
supposed  elevation  of  the  clerical  character,  by  preventing 
the  clergyman  from  cultivating  more  than  a  trifling  part  of  the 
land  attached  to  his  benefice — that  he  may  be  as  much  as 
possible  of  a  scientific  theologian,  and  as  little  as  possible  of 
a  peasant.  In  this,  Riehl  observes,  lies  one  great  source  of 
weakness  to  the  Protestant  Church  as  compared  with  the 
Catholic,  which  finds  the  great  majority  of  its  priests  among 
the  lower  orders;  and  we  have  had  the  opportunity  of 
making  an  analogous  comparison  in  England,  where  many 
of  us  can  remember  country  districts  in  which  the  great  mass 
of  the  people  were  Christianized  by  illiterate  Methodist  and 
Independent  ministers ;  while  the  influence  of  the  parish 
clergyman  among  the  poor  did  not  extend  much  beyond  a 
few  old  women  in  scarlet  cloaks,  and  a  few  exceptional 
church-going  laborers. 

Bearing  in  mind  the  general  characteristics  of  the  German 
peasant,  it  is  easy  to  understand  his  relation  to  the  revolu- 
tionary ideas  and  revolutionary  movements  of  modern  times. 
The  peasant  in  Germany,  as  elsewhere,  is  a  born  grumbler. 
He  has  always  plenty  of  grievances  in  his  pocket,  but  he 
does  not  generalize  those  grievances;  he  does  not  com- 
plain of  ''government"  or  "society,"  probably  because  he 
nas  good  reason  to  complain  of  the  burgomaster.  When 
a  few  sparks  from  the  first  French  Revolution  fell  among 
the  German  peasantry,  and  in  certain  villages  of  Saxony 
the  country  people  assembled  together  to  write  dowr. 
their  demands,  there  was  no  glimpse  in  their  petition  of 
the  "universal  rights  of  man,"  but  simply  of  their  own 
particular  affairs  as  Saxon  peasants.  Again,  after  the 
July  revolution  of  1830,  there  were  many  insignificant 
peasant  insurrections ;   but  the  object  of  almost  all  was 


RIEHL. 


H7 


the  removal  of  local  grievances.  Toll-houses  were  pulled 
down  ;  stamped  paper  was  destroyed  ;  in  some  places  there 
was  a  persecution  of  wild  boars,  in  others  of  that  plentiful 
tame  animal  the  German  Ratk,  or  councillor  who  is  never 
called  into  council.  But  in  1848  it  seemed  as  if  the  move- 
ments of  the  peasants  had  taken  a  new  character ;  in  the 
small  western  states  of  Germany  it  seemed  as  if  the  whole 
class  of  peasantry  was  in  insurrection.  But,  in  fact,  the 
peasant  did  not  know  the  meaning  of  the  part  he  was  play- 
ing. He  had  heard  that  everything  was  being  set  right  in 
the  towns,  and  that  wonderful  things  were  happening  there, 
so  he  tied  up  his  bundle  and  set  off.  Without  any  distinct 
object  or  resolution,  the  country  people  presented  them- 
selves on  the  scene  of  commotion,  and  were  warmly 
received  by  the  party  leaders.  But,  seen  from  the  windows 
of  ducal  palaces  and  ministerial  hotels,  these  swarms  of  peas- 
ants had  quite  another  aspect,  and  it  was  imagined  that  they 
had  a  common  plan  of  cooperation.  This,  however,  the 
peasants  have  never  had.  Systematic  cooperation  implies 
general  conceptions,  and  a  provisional  subordination  of 
egoism,  to  which  even  the  artisans  of  towns  have  rarely 
shown  themselves  equal,  and  which  are  as  foreign  to  the 
mind  of  the  peasant  as  logarithms  or  the  doctrinfe  of  chemi- 
cal proportions.  And  the  revolutionary  fervor  of  the  peas- 
ant was  soon  cooled.  The  old  mistrust  of  the  towns  was 
reawakened  on  the  spot.  The  Tyrolese  peasants  saw  no 
great  good  in  the  freedom  of  the  press  and  the  constitution, 
because  these  changes  "seemed  to  please  the  gentry  so 
much."  Peasants  who  had  given  their  voices  stormily  for' a 
German  parliament  asked  afterwards,  with  a  doubtful  look, 
whether  it  were  to  consist  of  infantry  or  cavalry.  When 
royal  domains  were  declared  the  property  of  the  state,  the 
peasants  in  some  small  principalities  rejoiced  over  this, 
because  they  interpreted  it  to  mean  that  every  one  would 
have  his  share  in  them,  after  the  manner  of  the  old  common 
and  forest  rights. 

The  very  practical  views  of  the  peasants,  with  regard  to 
the  demands  of  the  people,  were  in  amusing  contrast  with 
the  abstract  theorizing  of  the  educated  townsmen.  The 
peasant  continually  withheld  all  state  payments  until  he  saw- 
how  matters  would  turn  out,  and  was  disposed  to  reckon  up 
the  solicj  benefit^  in  the  form  of  land  or  money,  that  might 


148    THE  NA  TURAL  HISTOR  V  OF  GERMAN  LIFE: 

come  to  him  from  the  changes  obtained.  While  the  towns- 
man was  heating  his  brains  about  representation  on  the 
broadest  basis,  the  peasant  asked  if  the  relation  between 
tenant  and  landlord  would  continue  as  before,  and  whether 
the  removal  of  the  "feudal  obligations"  meant  that  the 
farmer  should  become  owner  of  the  land  ? 

It  is  in  the  same  naive  way  that  Communism  is  inter- 
preted by  the  German  peasantry.  The  wide  spread  among 
them  of  communistic  doctrines,  the  eagerness  with  which 
they  listened  to  a  plan  for  the  partition  of  property,  seemed 
to  countenance  the  notion  that  it  was  delusion  to  suppose 
the  peasant  would  be  secured  from  this  intoxication  by  his 
love  of  secure  possession  and  peaceful  earnings.  But,  in 
fact,  the  peasant  contemplated  "  partition"  by  the  light  of  an 
historical  reminiscence  rather  than  of  novel  theory.  The 
golden  age,  in  the  imagination  of  the  peasant,  was  the  time 
when  every  member  of  the  Commune  had  a  right  to  as  much 
wood  from  the  forest  as  would  enable  him  to  sell  some,  after 
using  what  he  wanted  in  firing,  in  which  the  Communal 
possessions  were  so  profitable  that,  instead  of  his  having  to 
pay  rates  at  the  end  of  the  year,  each  member  of  the  Com- 
mune was  something  in  pocket.  Hence,  the  peasants  in 
general  understood  by  partition"  that  the  state  lands, 
especially  the  forests,  would  be  divided  among  the  Com- 
munes, and  that,  by  some  political  legerdemain  or  other, 
everybody  would  have  free  firewood,  free  grazing  for  his 
cattle,  and,  over  and  above  that,  a  piece  of  gold  without 
working  for  it.  That  he  should  give  up  a  single  clod  of  his 
oVn  to  further  the  general  "partition''  had  never  entered 
the  mind  of  the  peasant  Communist:  and  the  perception  that 
this  was  an  essential  preliminary  to  "partition"  was  often 
a  sufficient  cure  for  his  Communism. 

In  villages  lying  in  the  neighborhood  of  large  towns, 
however,  where  the  circumstances  of  the  peasantry  are  very 
different,  quite  another  interpretation  of  Communism  is  pre- 
valent. Here  the  peasant  is  generally  sunk  to  the  position 
of  the  proletaire,  living  from  hand  to  mouth :  he  has  nothing 
to  lose,  but  everything  to  gain  by  "partition."  The  coarse 
nature  of  the  peasant  has  here  been  corrupted  into  bestiality 
by  the  disturbance  of  his  instincts,  while  he  is  as  yet  incap- 
able of  principles  ;  and  in  this  type  of  the  degenerate  peasant 
is  seen  the  worst  example  of  ignorance  intoxicated  by  theory. 


RIEHL. 


A  significant  hint  as  to  the  interpretation  the  peasants 
put  on  revolutionary  theories  may  be  drawn  from  the  way 
they  employed  the  few  weeks  in  which  their  movements 
were  unchecked.  They  felled  the  forest  trees  and  shot  the 
game  ;  they  withheld  taxes;  they  shook  off  the  imaginary 
or  real  burdens  imposed  on  them  by  their  mediatized  prin- 
ces, by  presenting  their  "demands"  in  a  very  rough  way 
before  the  ducal  or  princely  "  Schloss ;  "  they  set  their  faces 
against  the  bureaucratic  management  of  the  Communes, 
deposed  the  government  functionaries  who  had  been  placed 
over  them  as  burgomasters  and  magistrates,  and  abolishsd 
the  whole  bureaucratic  system  of  procedure,  simply  by  tak- 
ing no  notice  of  its  regulations,  and  recurring  to  some  tradi- 
tion— some  old  order  or  disorder  of  things.  In  all  this  it 
is  clear  that  they  were  animated  not  in  the  least  by  the 
spirit  of  modern  revolution,  but  by  a  purely  narrow  and 
personal  impulse  towards  reaction. 

The  idea  of  constitutional  government  lies  quite  beyond 
the  range  of  the  German  peasant's  conception.  His  only 
notion  of  representation  is  that  of  a  representation  of  ranks 
—of  classes ;  his  only  notion  of  a  deputy  is  of  one  who  takes 
care,  not  only  of  the  national  welfare,  but  of  the  interests  of 
his  own  order.  Herein  lay  the  great  mistake  of  the  demo- 
cratic party,  in  common  with  the  bureaucratic  governments, 
that  they  entirely  omitted  the  peculiar  character  of  the 
peasant  from  their  political  calculations.  They  talked  of 
the  people,"  and  forgot  that  the  peasants  were  included  in 
the  term.  Only  a  baseless  misconception  of  the  peasant's 
character  could  induce  the  supposition  that  he  would  feel  the 
slightest  enthusiasm  about  the  principles  involved  in  the 
reconstitution  of  the  Empire,  or  even  about  that  reconstitu- 
tion  itself.  He  has  no  zeal  for  a  written  law%  as  such,  but 
only  so  far  as  it  takes  the  form  of  living  law — a  tradition. 
It  was  the  external  authority  which  the  revolutionary  party 
had  won  in  Baden  that  attracted  the  peasants  into  a  par- 
ticipation in  the  struggle. 

Such,  Riehl  tells  us,  are  the  general  characteristics  of  Ger- 
man peasantry — characteristics  which  subsist  amid  a  wide 
variety  of  circumstances.  In  Mecklenburg,  Pomerania,  and 
Brandenburg,  the  peasant  lives  on  extensive  estates ;  in  West- 
phalia he  lives  in  large  isolated  homesteads ;  in  the  Westerwald 
and  in  Sauerland,  in  little  groups  of  villages  and  hamlets ;  on 


150    THE  NA  TVRAL  HISTOR  V  OF  GERMAN  LIFE:: 


the  Rhine,  land  is  for  the  most  part  parcelled  out  among  small 
proprietors,  who  live  together  in  large  villages.  Then,  of 
course,  the  diversified  physical  geography  of  Germany  gives 
rise  to  equally  diversified  methods  of  land-culture ;  and  out  of 
these  various  circumstances  grow  numerous  specific  differences 
in  manner  and  character.  But  the  generic  character  of  the 
German  peasant  is  everywhere  the  same:  in  the  clean  moun- 
tain hamlet  and  in  the  dirty  fishing-villages  on  the  coast ;  in 
the  plains  of  North  Germany  and  in  the  backwoods  of  Amer- 
ica. "Everywhere  he  has  the  same  historical  character — 
everywhere  custom  is  his  supreme  law.  Where  religion  and 
patriotism  are  still  a  naive  instinct  — are  still  a  sacred  custom 
— there  begins  the  class  of  the  German  Peasantry" 

Our  readers  will  perhaps  already  have  gathered  from  the 
foregoing  portrait  of  the  German  Peasant  that  Riehl  is  not  a 
man  who  looks  at  objects  through  the  spectacles  either  of 
the  <^(?<;^n;2<22V^  or  the  dreamer;  and  they  will  be  ready  to 
believe  what  he  tells  us  in  his  Preface — namely,  that  years 
ago  he  began  his  wanderings  over  the  hills  and  plains  of 
Germany  for  the  sake  of  obtaining,  in  immediate  intercourse 
with  the  people,  that  completion  of  historical,  political,  and 
economical  studies  which  he  was  unable  to  find  in  books. 
He  began  his  investigations  with  no  party  prepossessions, 
and  his  present  views  were  evolved  entirely  from  his  own 
gradually  amassed  observations.  He  was,  first  of  all,  a 
pedestrian,  and  only  in  the  second  place  a  political  author. 
The  views  at  which  he  has  arrived  by  this  inductive  process, 
he  sums  up  in  the  term — social-political-conservatism  ;  but 
his  conservatism  is,  we  conceive,  of  a  thoroughly  philosophi- 
cal kind.  He  sees  in  European  society  iyicarnate  history, 
and  any  attempt  to  disengage  it  from  its  historical  elements 
must,  he  believes,  be  simply  destructive  of  social  vitality. 
What  has  grown  up  historically  can  only  die  out  historically, 
by  the  gradual  operation  of  necessary  law.  The  external 
conditions  which  society  has  inherited  from  the  past  are  but 
the  manifestation  of  inherited  conditions  in  the  human 
beings  who  compose  it ;  the  internal  conditions  and  the 
external  are  related  to  each  other  as  the  organism  and  its 

*  Throughout  this  article,  in  our  statement  of  Riehl' s  opinions,  we 
must  be  understood  not  as  quoting  Riehl,  but  as  interpreting  and 
illustrating  him. 


RIEHL, 


medium,  and  development  can  take  place  only  by  the  grad- 
ual consentaneous  development  of  both.  Take  the  familiar 
example  of  attempts  to  abolish  titles,  which  have  been  about 
as  effective  as  the  process  of  cutting  off  poppy-heads  in  a 
corn-field.  "  Jedern  Mensclcen^'  says  Riehl,  "  ist  sein  Zopf 
angeboren,  warum  soil  denn  der  sociale  Sprachgebranch  nicht 
auch  seinen  Zopf  haben  ?  " — which  we  may  render.  As 
long  as  snobbism  runs  in  the  blood,  why  should  it  not  run 
in  our  speech?"  As  a  necessary  preHminary  to  a  purely 
rational  society,  you  must  obtain  purely  rational  men,  free 
from  the  sweet  and  bitter  prejudices  of  hereditary  affection 
and  antipathy ;  which  is  as  easy  as  to  get  running  streams 
without  springs,  or  the  leafy  shade  of  the  forest  without  the 
secular  growth  of  trunk  and  branch. 

The  historical  conditions  of  society  may  be  compared  with 
those  of  language.  It  must  be  admitted  that  the  language 
of  cultivated  nations  is  in  anything  but  a  rational  state ;  the 
great  sections  of  the  civilized  world  are  only  approximatively 
intelligible  to  each  other,  and  even  that  only  at  the  cost  of 
long  study;  one  word  stands  for  many  things,  and  many 
words  for  one  thing;  the  subtile  shades  of  meaning,  and 
still  subtiler  echoes  of  association,  make  language  an  instru- 
ment which  scarcely  anything  short  of  genius  can  wield  with 
definiteness  and  certainty.  Suppose,  then,  that  the  effort 
which  has  been  again  and  again  made  to  construct  a  univer- 
sal language  on  a  rational  basis  has  at  length  succeeded,  and 
that  you  have  a  language  which  has  no  uncertainty,  no 
whims  of  idiom,  no  cumbrous  forms,  no  fitful  shimmer  of 
many-hued  significance,  no  hoary  archaisms  "familiar  with  ^ 
forgotten  years" — a  patent  deodorized  and  non-resonant 
language,  which  effects  the  purpose  of  communication  as 
perfectly  and  rapidly  as  algebraic  signs.  Your  language 
may  be  a  perfect  medium  of  expression  to  science,  but  will 
never  express  life,  which  is  a  great  deal  more  than  science. 
With  the  anomalies  and  inconveniences  of  historical  language, 
you  will  have  parted  with  its  music  and  its  passion,  with  its 
vital  qualities  as  an  expression  of  individual  character,  with 
its  subtle  capabilities  of  wit,  with  everything  that  gives  it 
power  over  the  imagination;  and  the  next  step  in  simplifica- 
tion will  be  the  invention  of  a  talking  w^atch,  which  will 
achieve  the  utmost  facility  and  despatch  in  the  communica- 
tion of  ideas  by  a  graduated  adjustment  of  ticks,  to  be 


1 52    THE  NA  TURAL  HISTOR  V  OF  GERMAN  LIFE : 


represented  in  writing  by  a  corresponding  arrangement  of 
dots.  A  melancholy  language  of  the  future!"  The  sen- 
sory and  motor  nerves  that  run  in  the  same  sheath  are 
scarcely  bound  together  by  a  more  necessary  and  delicate 
union  than  that  which  binds  men's  affections,  imagination, 
wit,  and  humor,  with  the  subtile  ramifications  of  historical 
language.  Language  must  be  left  to  grow  in  precision,  com- 
pleteness, and  unity,  as  minds  grow  in  clearness,  compre- 
^■•ensiveness,  and  sympathy.  And  there  is  an  analogous 
relation  between  the  moral  tendencies  of  men  and  the  social 
conditions  they  have  inherited.  The  nature  of  European 
men  has  its  roots  intertwined  with  the  past,  and  can  only 
be  developed  by  allowing  those  roots  to  remain  undisturbed 
while  the  process  of  development  is  going  on,  until  that  per- 
fect ripeness  of  the  seed  which  carries  with  it  a  life  indepen- 
dent of  the  root.  This  vital  connection  with  the  past  is 
much  more  vividly  felt  on  the  Continent  than  in  England, 
where  we  have  to  recall  it  by  an  effort  of  memory  and 
reflection  ;  for  though  our  English  life  is  in  its  core  intensely 
traditional.  Protestantism  and  commerce  have  modernized 
the  face  of  the  land  and  the  aspects  of  society  in  a  far  greater 
degree  than  in  any  Continental  country: 

"Abroad,"  says  Ruskin,  "  a  building  of  the  eighth  or  tenth  century 
stands  ruinous  in  the  open  street ;  the  children  play  around  it,  the 
peasants  heap  their  corn  in  it,  the  buildings  of  yesterday  nestle  about 
it,  and  fit  their  new  stones  in  its  rents,  and  tremble  in  sympathy  as  it 
trembles.  No  one  wonders  at  it,  or  thinks  of  it  as  separate,  and  of 
another  time ;  we  feel  the  ancient  world  to  be  a  real  thing,  and  one 
with  the  new  ;  antiquity  is  no  dream  ;  it  is  rather  the  children  playing 
about  the  old'stones  that  are  the  dream.  But  all  is  continuous,  and 
the  words,  'from  generation  to  generation,'  understandable  here.'* 

This  conception  of  European  society  as  incarnate  history  is 
the  fundamental  idea  of  Riehl's  books. 

After  the  notable  failure  of  revolutionary  attempts  con- 
ducted from  the  point  of  view  of  abstract  democratic  and 
socialistic  theories,  after  the  practical  demonstration  of  the 
evils  resulting  from  a  bureaucratic  system  which  governs  by 
an  undiscriminating,  dead  mechanism,  Riehl  wishes  to  urge  on 
the  consideration  of  his  countrymen  a  social  poHcy  founded 
on  the  special  study  of  the  people  as  they  are — on  the  nat- 
ural history  of  the  various  social  ranks.  He,  thinks  it  wise  to 
pause  a  little  from  theorizing,  and  see  what  is  the  material 
actually  present  for  theory  to  work  upon.    It  is  the  glory  of 


RTEHL. 


153 


the  Socialists — in  contrast  with  the  democratic  doctrinaires^ 
who  have  been  too  much  occupied  with  the  general  idea  of 
the  people  "  to  inquire  particularly  into  the  actual  life  of 
the  people — that  they  have  thrown  themselves  with  enthu- 
.siastic  zeal  into  the  study  at  least  of  one  social  group — 
namely,  the  factory  operatives  ;  and  here  lies  the  secret  of 
their  partial  success.  But,  unfortunately,  they  have  made 
this  special  study  or  a  single  fragment  of  society  the  basis 
of  a  theory  which  quietly  substitutes  for  the  small  group  of 
Parisian  proletaires  or  English  factory-workers,  the  society 
of  all  Europe — nay,  of  the  whole  world.  And  in  this  way 
they  have  lost  the  best  fruit  of  their  investigations.  For, 
says  Riehl,  the  more  deeply  we  penetrate  into  the  knowl- 
edge of  society  in  its  details,  the  more  thoroughly  we  shall 
be  convinced  that  a  universal  social  policy  has  no  validity 
except  on  paper,  and  can  never  be  carried  into  successful 
practice.  The  conditions  of  German  society  are  altogether 
different  from  those  of  French,  of  English,  or  of  Italian 
society ;  and  to  apply  the  same  social  theory  to  these 
nations  indiscriminately,  is  about  as  wise  a  procedure  as 
Triptolemus  Yellowley's  application  of  the  agricultural 
directions  in  Virgil's  "  Georgics  "  to  his  farm  in  the  Shet- 
land Isles. 

It  is  the  clear  and  strong  light  in  which  Riehl  places  this 
important  position  that  in  our  opinion  constitutes  the^sug- 
gestive  value  of  his  books  for  foreign  as  well  as  German 
readers.  It  has  not  been  sufficiently  insisted  on,  that  in  the 
various  branches  of  Social  Science  there  is  an  advance  from 
the  general  to  the  special,  from  the  simple  to  the  complex, 
analogous  with  that  which  is  found  in  the  series  of  the 
sciences,  from  Mathematics  to  Biology.  To  the  laws  of 
quantity  comprised  in  Mathematics  and  Physics  are  super- 
added, in  Chemistry,  laws  of  quality ;  to  these  again  are 
added,  in  Biology,  laws  of  life  ;  and,  lastly,  the  conditions  of 
life  in  general  branch  out  into  its  special  conditions  or  Nat- 
ural History,  on  the  one  hand,  and  into  its  abnormal  con- 
ditions, or  Pathology,  on  the  other.  And  in  this  series  or 
ramification  of  the  sciences,  the  more  general  science  will 
not  suffice  to  solve  the  problems  of  the  more  special. 
Chemistry  embraces  phenomena  which  are  not  explicable 
by  physics ;  Biology  embraces  phenomena  which  are  not 
explicable  by  Chemistry ;  and  no  biological  generalization 
will  enable  us  to  predict  the  infinite  specialties  produced  by 


X  54    THE  NA  TURAL  HISTOR  Y  OF  GERMAN  LIFE? 


the  complexity  of  vital  conditions.  So  Social  Science,  while 
it  has  departments  which  in  their  fundamental  generality- 
correspond  to  mathematics  and  physics — namely,  those 
grand  and  simple  generalizations  which  trace  out  the  inevi- 
table march  of  the  human  race  as  a  whole,  and,  as  a  ramifi- 
cation of  these,  the  laws  of  economical  science — has  also,  in 
the  departments  of  Government  and  jurisprudence,  which 
embrace  the  conditions  of  social  life  in  all  their  complexity, 
what  may  be  called  its  Biology,  carrying  us  on  to  innumer- 
able special  phenomena  which  outlie  the  sphere  of  science, 
and  belong  to  Natural  History.  And  just  as  the  most 
thorough  acquaintance  with  physics,  or  chemistry,  or  gen- 
eral physiology  will  not  enable  you  at  once  to  establish  the 
balance  of  life  in  your  private  vivarium,  so  that  your  parti- 
cular society  of  zoophytes,  molluscs,  and  echinoderms  may 
feel  themselves,  as  the  Germans  say,  at  ease  in  their  skin ; 
so  the  most  complete  equipment  of  theory  will  not  enable  a 
statesman  or  a  political  and  social  reformer  to  adjust  his 
measures  wisely,  in  the  absence  of  a  special  acquaintance 
with  the  section  of  society  for  which  he  legislates,  with  the 
peculiar  characteristics  of  the  nation,  the  province,  the  class 
whose  well-being  he  has  to  consult.  In  other  words,  a  wise 
social  policy  must  be  based  not  simply  on  abstract  social 
science,  but  on  the  natural  history  of  social  bodies. 

Riehl's  books  are  not  dedicated  merely  to  the  argument- 
ative maintenance  of  this  or  of  any  other  position ;  they  are 
intended  chiefly  as  a  contribution  to  that  knowledge  of  the 
German  people  on  the  importance  of  which  he  insists.  He 
is  less  occupied  with  urging  his  own  conclusions  than  with 
impressing  on  his  readers  the  facts  which  have  led  him  to 
those  conclusions.  In  the  volume  entitled  Land  und 
Leute,"  which,  though  published  last,  is  properly  an  intro- 
duction to  the  volume  entitled  "  Die  Biirgerliche  Gesellschaft," 
he  considers  the  German  people  in  their  physical  geographi- 
cal relations ;  he  compares  the  natural  divisions  of  the  race, 
as  determined  by  land  and  climate,  and  social  traditions,  with 
the  artificial  divisions  which  are  based  on  diplomacy ;  and  he 
traces  the  genesis  and  influences  of  what  we  may  call  the 
ecclesiastical  geography  of  Germany — its  partition  between 
Catholicism  and  Protestantism.  He  shows  that  the  ordinary 
antithesis  of  North  and  South  Germany. represents  no  real 
ethnographical  distinction,  and  that  the  natural  divisions  of 


RIEHL. 


155 


Germany,  founded  on  its  physical  geography,  are  threefold ; 
namely,  the  low  plains,  the  middle  mountian  region,  and  the 
high  mountain  region,  or  Lower,  Middle,  and  Upper  Ger- 
many; and  on  this  primary  natural  division  all  the  other 
broad  ethnographical  distinctions  of  Germany  will  be  found 
to  rest.  The  plains  of  North  or  Lower  Germany  include  all 
the  seaboard  the  nation  possesses;  and  this,  together  with 
the  fact  that  they  are  traversed  to  the  depth  of  six  hundred 
miles  by  navigable  rivers,  makes  them  the  natural  seat  of  a 
trading  race.  Quite  different  is  the  geographical  character 
of  Middle  Germany.  While  the  northern  plams  are  marked 
off  into  great  divisions,  by  such  rivers  as  the  Lower  Rhine, 
the  Weser,  and  the  Oder,  running  almost  in  parallel  lines, 
this  central  region  is  cut  up  like  a  mosaic  by  the  capricious 
lines  of  valleys  and  rivers.  Here  is  the  region  in  which  you 
find  those  famous  roofs  from  which  the  rain-water  runs 
towards  two  different  seas,  and  the  mountain-tops  from  which 
you  may  look  into  eight  or  ten  German  states.  The  abund- 
ance of  water-power  and  the  presence  of  extensive  coal-mines 
allow  of  a  very  diversified  industrial  development  in  Middle 
Germany.  In  Upper  Germany,  or  the  high  mountain  region, 
we  find  the  same  symmetry  in  the  lines  of  the  rivers  as  in 
the  north;  almost  all  the  great  Alpine  streams  flow  parallel 
with  the  Danube.  But  the  majority  of  these  rivers  are 
neither  navigable  nor  available  for  industrial  objects,  and 
instead  of  serving  for  communication  they  shut  off  one  great 
tract  from  another.  The  slow  development,  the  simple 
peasant-Hfe  of  many  districts,  is  here  determined  by  the 
mountain  and  the  river.  In  the  southeast,  however,  indus- 
trial activity  spreads  through  Bohemia  towards  Austria,  and 
forms  a  sort  of  balance  to  the  industrial  districts  of  the 
Lower  Rhine.  Of  course,  the  boundaries  of  these  three 
regions  cannot  be  very  strictly  defined ;  but  an  approxima- 
tion to  the  limits  of  Middle  Germany  may  be  obtained  by 
regarding  it  as  a  triangle,  of  which  one  angle  lies  in  Silesia, 
another  in  Aix-la-Chapelle,  and  a  third  at  Lake  Constance. 

This  triple  division  corresponds  with  the  broad  distinctions 
of  cHmate.  In  the  northern  plains  the  atmosphere  is  damp 
and  heavy;  in  the  southern  mountain  region  it  is  dry  and 
rare,  and  there  are  adrupt  changes  of  temperature,  sharp  con- 
trasts between  the  seasons,  and  devastating  storms;  but  in 
both  these  zones  men  are  hardened  by  conflict  with  the  rough- 


I  s6    THE  NA  TURAL  HIS  TOR  Y  OF  GERMAN  LIFE  : 


ness  of  the  climate.  In  Middle  Germany,  on  the  contrary, 
there  is  little  of  this  struggle ;  the  seasons  are  more  equable, 
and  the  mild,  soft  air  of  the  valleys  tends  to  make  the  inhabit- 
ants luxurious  and  sensitive  to  hardships.  It  is  only  in 
exceptional  mountain  districts  that  one  is  here  reminded  of 
the  rough,  bracing  air  on  the  heights  of  Southern  Germany. 
It  is  a  curious  fact  that,  as  the  air  becomes  gradually  lighter 
and  rarer  from  the  North  German  coast  towards  Upper  Ger- 
many, the  average  of  suicides  regularly  decreases.  Mecklen- 
burg has  the  highest  number,  than  Prussia,  while  the  fewest 
suicides  occur  in  Bavaria  and  Austria. 

Both  the  northern  and  southern  regions  have  still  a  large 
extent  of  waste  lands,  downs,  morasses,  and  heaths;  and  to 
these  are  added,  in  the  south,  abundance  of  snow-fields  and 
naked  rock ;  while  in  Middle  Germany  culture  has  almost 
overspread  the  face  of  the  land,  and  there  are  no  large  tracts 
of  waste.  There  is  the  same  proportion  in  the  distribution 
of  forests.  Again,  in  the  north  we  see  a  monotonous  con- 
tinuity of  wheat-fields^  potato-grounds,  meadow-lands,  and 
vast  heaths ;  and  there  is  the  same  uniformity  of  culture  over 
large  surfaces  in  the  southern  table-lands  and  the  Alpine 
pastures.  In  Middle  Germany,  on  the  contrary,  there  is  a 
perpetual  variety  of  crops  within  a  short  space ;  the  diversity 
of  land  surface  and  the  corresponding  variety  in  the  species 
of  plants  are  an  invitation  to  the  splitting- up  of  estates,  and 
this  again  encourages  to  the  utmost  the  motley  character  of 
the  cultivation. 

According  to  this  threefold  division,  it  appears  that  there 
are  certain  features  common  to  North  and  South  Germany  in 
which  they  differ  from  Central  Germany,  and  the  nature  of 
this  difference  Riehl  indicates  by  distinguishing  the  former 
as  Centralized  Land  and  the  latter  as  Individualized  Land 
— a  distinction  which  is  well  symbolized  by  the  fact  that 
North  and  South  Germany  possess  the  great  lines  of  railway 
which  are  the  medium  for  the  traffic  of  the  world,  while  Mid- 
dle Germany  is  far  richer  in  lines  for  local  communication, 
and  possesses  the  greatest  length  of  railway  within  the  small- 
est space.  Disregarding  superficialities,  the  East  Fries- 
landers,  the  Schleswig-Holsteinera,  the  Mecklenburgers,  and 
the  Pomeranians  are  much  more  nearly  aUied  to  the  old 
Bavarians,  the  Tyrolese,  and  the  Styrians,  than  any  of  these 
are  ?iUied  to  the  Saxons,  the  Thuringians,  or  the  Rhine- 


RIEHL. 


J57 


landers.  Both  in  North  and  South  Germany  original  races 
are  still  found  in  large  masses,  and  popular  dialects  are 
spoken;  you  still  find  there  thoroughly  peasant  districts, 
thorough  villages,  and  also,  at  great  intervals,  thorough 
cities;  you  still  find  there  a  sense  of  rank.  In  Middle  Ger- 
many, on  the  contrary,  the  original  races  are  fused  together 
or  sprinkled  hither  and  thither;  the  peculiarities  of  the  pop- 
ular dialects  are  worn  down  or  confused ;  there  is  no  very 
strict  line  of  demarcation  between  the  country  and  the  town 
population,  hundreds  of  small  towns  and  large  villages  being 
hardly  distinguishable  in  their  characteristics ;  and  the  sense 
of  rank,  as  part  of  the  organic  structure  of  society,  is  almost 
extinguished.  Again,  both  in  the  north  and  south  there  is 
still  a  strong  ecclesiastical  spirit  in  the  people,  and  the  Pom- 
eranian sees  Antichrist  in  the  Pope  as  clearly  as  the  Tyro- 
lese  sees  him  in  Doctor  Luther;  while  in  Middle  Germany 
the  confessions  are  mingled — they  exist  peaceably  side  by 
side  in  very  narrow  space,  and  tolerance  or  indifference  has 
spread  itself  widely  even  in  the  popular  mind.  And  the 
analogy,  or  rather  the  causal  relation,  between  the  physical 
geography  of  the  three  regions  and  the  development  of  the 
population  goes  still  further: 

"  For,"  observes  Riehl,  "the  striking  connection  which  has  been 
pointed  out  between  the  local  geological  formations  in  Germany  and 
the  revolutionary  disposition  of  the  people,  has  more  than  a  meta- 
phorical significance.  Where  the  primeval  physical  revolutions  of 
the  globe  have  been  the  wildest  in  their  effects,  and  the  most  multi- 
form strata  have  been  tossed  together  or  thrown  one  upon  the  other, 
it  is  a  very  intelligible  consequence  that  on  a  land  surface  thus  broken 
up,  the  population  should  sooner  develop  itself  into  small  commu- 
nities, and  that  the  more  intense  life  generated  in  these  smaller  com- 
munities should  become  the  most  favorable  nidus  for  the  reception  of 
modern  culture,  and  with  this  a  susceptibility  for  its  revolutionary- 
ideas;  while  a  people  settled  in  a  region  where  its  groups  are  spread 
over  a  large  space  will  persist  much  more  obstinately  in  the  retention 
of  its  original  charactor.  The  people  of  Middle  Germany  have  none 
of  that  exclusive  one-sidedness  which  determines  the  peculiar  genius 
of  great  national  groups,  just  as  this  one-sidedness  or  uniformity  is 
wanting  to  the  geological  and  geographical  character  of  their  land." 

This  ethnographical  outline  Riehl  fills  up  with  special  and 
typical  descriptions,  and  then  makes  it  the  starting-point  for 
a  criticism  of  the  actual  political  condition  of  Germany. 
The  volume  is  full  of  vivid  pictures,  as  well  as  penetrating 
glances  into  the  maladies  and  tendencies  of  modern  society. 


i $8    THE  NA  TURAL  HISTOR  Y  OF  GERMAN  LIFE: 


It  would  be  fascinating  as  literature,  if  it  were  not  important 
for  its  facts  and  philosophy.  But  we  can  only  commend  it 
to  our  readers,  and  pass  on  to  the  volume  entitled  Die 
Biirgerliche  Gesellschaft,"  from  which  we  have  drawn  our 
sketch  of  the  German  peasantry.  Here  Riehl  gives  us  a 
series  of  studies  in  that  natural  history  of  the  people  which 
he  regards  as  the  proper  basis  of  social  policy.  He  holds 
that,  in  European  society,  there  are  three  natural  ranks  or 
estates:  the  hereditary  landed  aristocracy,  the  citizens  or 
commercial  class,  and  the  peasantry  or  agricultural  class. 
By  natural  ranks  he  means  ranks  which  have  their  roots 
deep  in  the  historical  structure  of  society,  and  are  still,  in 
the  present,  showing  vitality  above  ground ;  he  means  those 
great  social  groups  which  are  not  only  distinguished  exter- 
nally by  their  vocation,  but  essentially  by  their  mental  char- 
acter, their  habits,  their  mode  of  life — by  the  principle  they 
represent  in  the  historical  development  of  society.  In  his 
conception  of  the  ''Fourth  Estate  "  he  differs  from  the  usual 
interpretation,  according  to  which  it  is  simply  equivalent  to 
the  Proletariat,  or  those  who  are  dependent  on  daily  wages, 
whose  only  capital  is  their  skill  or  bodily  strength— factory 
operatives,  artisans,  agricultural  laborers,  to  whom  might  be 
added,  especially  in  Germany,  the  day-laborers  with  the  quill, 
the  literary  proletariat.  This,  Riehl  observes,  is  a  valid 
basis  of  economical  classification,  but  not  of  social  classifi- 
cation. In  his  view,  the  Fourth  Estate  is  a  stratum  pro- 
duced by  the  perpetual  abrasion  of  the  other  great  social 
groups ;  it  is  the  sign  and  result  of  the  decomposition  which 
is  commencing  in  the  organic  constitution  of  society.  Its 
elements  are  derived  aKke  from  the  aristocracy,  the  bour- 
geoisie, and  the  peasantry.  It  assembles  under  its  banner 
the  deserters  of  historical  society,  and  forms  them  into  a 
terrible  army,  which  is  only  just  awaking  to  the  conscious- 
ness of  its  corporate  power.  The  tendency  of  this  Fourth 
Estate,  by  the  very  process  of  its  formation,  is  to  do  away 
with  the  distinctive  historical  character  of  the  other  estates, 
and  to  resolve  their  peculiar  rank  and  vocation  into  a  uniform 
social  relation  founded  on  an  abstract  conception  of  society. 
According  to  Riehl's  classification,  the  day-laborers,  whom 
the  political  economist  designates  as  the  Fourth  Estate, 
belong  partly  to  the  peasantry  or  agricultural  class,  and 
partly  to  the  citizens  or  commercial  class. 


RHIEL. 


159 


Riehl  considers,  in  the  first  place,  the  peasantry  and  aris- 
tocracy as  the  "Forces  of  social  persistence,"  and,  in  the 
second,  the  bourgeoisie  and  the  "fourth  estate"  as  the 
"Forces  of  social  movement.'' 

The  aristocracy,  he  observes,  is  the  only  one  among  these 
four  groups  which  is  denied  by  others  besides  Socialists  to 
have  any  natural  basis  as  a  separate  rank.  It  is  admitted 
that  there  was  once  an  aristocracy  which  had  an  intrinsic 
ground  of  existence;  but  now,  it  is  alleged,  this  is  an  histori- 
cal fossil,  an  antiquarian  relic,  venerable  because  gray  with 
age.  In  what,  it  is  asked,  can  consist  the  peculiar  vocation 
of  the  aristocracy,  since  it  has  no  longer  the  monopoly  of 
the  land,  of  the  higher  military  functions,  and  of  government 
offices,  and  since  the  service  of  the  court  has  no  longer  any 
political  importance?  To  this- Riehl  replies  that  in  great 
revolutionary  crises,  the  "men  of  progress"  have  more  than 
once  "abolished"  the  aristocracy.  But,  remarkably  enough, 
the  aristocracy  has  always  reappeared.  This  measure  of 
abolition  showed  that  the  nobility  were  no  longer  regarded 
as  a  real  class,  for  to  abolish  a  real  class  would  be  an  absurd- 
ity. It  is  quite  possible  to  contemplate  a  voluntary  break- 
ing up  of  the  peasant  or  citizen  class  in  the  socialistic  sense, 
but  no  man  m  his  senses  would  think  of  straightway  "abol- 
ishing" citizens  and  peasants.  The  aristocracy,  then,  was 
regarded  as  a  sort  of  cancer,  or  excrescence  of  society. 
Nevertheless,  not  only  has  it  been  found  impossible  to  anni- 
hilate an  hereditary  nobility  by  decree ;  but  also,  the  aristoc- 
racy  of  the  eighteenth  century  outlived  even  the  self-destruc- 
tive acts  of  its  own  perversity.  A  life  which  was  entirely 
without  object,  entirely  destitute  of  functions,  would  not,  says 
Riehl,  be  so  persistent.  He  has  an  acute  criticism  of  those 
who  conduct  a  polemic  against  the  idea  of  an  hereditary 
,  aristocracy  while  they  are  proposing  an  "aristocracy  of 
talent,"  which,  after  all,  is  based  on  the  principle  of  inheri- 
tance. The  Socialists  are,  therefore,  only  consistent  in 
declaring  against  an  aristocracy  of  talent.  "  But  when  they 
have  turned  the  world  into  a  great  Foundling  Hospital,  they 
will  still  be  unable  to  eradicate  the  ^privileges  of  birth.'" 
We  must  not  follow  him  in  his  critcism,  however;  nor  can 
we  afford  to  do  more  than  mention  hastily  his  interesting 
sketch  of  the  mediaeval  aristocracy,  and  his  admonition  to 
the  German  aristocracy  of  the  present  day,  that  the  vitality 


i6q    the  natural  HISTORY  OF  GERMAN  LIFE: 


of  their  class  is  not  to  be  sustained  by  romantic  attempts  to 
revive  mediaeval  forms  and  sentiments,  but  only  by  the  exer- 
cise of  functions  as  real  and  salutary  for  actual  society  as 
those  of  the  mediaeval  aristocracy  were  for.  the  feudal  age. 
"  In  modern  society  the  divisions  of  rank  indicate  division  of 
labor,  according  to  that  distribution  of  functions  in  the  social 
organism  which  the  historical  constitution  of  society  has 
determined.  In  this  way  the  principle  of  differentiation  and 
the  principle  of  unity  are  identical." 

The  elaborate  study  of  the  German  bourgeoisie  which 
forms  the  next  division  of  the  volume  must  be  passed  over; 
but  we  may  pause  a  moment  to  note  Riehl's  definition  of 
the  social  Philister  (Philistine),  an  epithet  for  which  we 
have  no  equivalent — not  at  all,  however,  for  want  of  the 
object  it  represents.  Most  people  who  read  a  little  German 
know  that  the  epithet  Philister  originated  in  the  Burschen- 
Leben,  or  student-life  of  Germany,  and  that  the  antithesis  of 
Biirsch  and  Philister  was  equivalent  to  the  antithesis  of 
"gown"  and  "town;  "  but  since  the  word  has  passed  into 
ordinary  language,  it  has  assumed  several  shades  of  signifi- 
cance which  have  not  yet  been  merged  in  a  single  absolute 
meaning ;  and  one  of  the  questions  which  an  English  visitor 
in  Germany  will  probably  take  an  opportunity  of  asking  is, 
"What  is  the  strict  meaning  of  the  word  Philister?'' 
Riehl's  answer  is,  that  the  Philister  is  one  who  is  indifferent 
to  all  social  interests,  all  public  life,  as  distinguished  from 
selfish  and  private  interests;  he  has  no  sympathy  with  politi- 
cal and  social  events  except  as  they  affect  his  own  comfort 
and  prosperity,  as  they  offer  him  material  for  amusement 
or  opportunity  for  gratifying  his  vanity.  He  has  no  social 
or  political  creed,  but  is  always  of  the  opinion  which  is  most 
convenient  for  the  moment.  He  is  always  in  the  majority, 
and  is  the  main  element  of  unreason  and  stupidity  in  tlie 
judgment  of  a  "discerning  public."  It  seems  presumptuous 
in  us  to  dispute  Riehl's  interpretation  of  a  German  word,  but 
we  must  think  that,  in  literature,  the  epithet  Philister  has 
usually  a  wider  meaning  than  this— includes  his  definition 
and  something  more.  We  imagine  the  Philister  is  the  per- 
sonification of  the  spirit  which  judges  everything  from  a 
lower  point  of  view  than  the  subject  demands — which  judges 
the  affairs  of  the  parish  from  the  egotistic  or  purely  per- 
sonal point  of  view ;  and  does  not  hesitate  to  measure  the 


RIEHL. 


i6i 


merits  of  the  universe  from  the  human  point  of  view.  At 
least,  this  must  surely  be  the  spirit  to  which  Goethe  alludes 
in  a  passage  cited  by  Riehl  himself,  where  he  says  that  the 
Germans  need  not  be  ashamed  of  erecting  a  monument  to 
him  as  well  as  to  Blucher;  for  if  Blucher  had  freed  them 
from  the  French,  he  (Goethe)  had  freed  them  from  the  nets 
of  the  Philister : 

.  "  Ihr  mogt  mir  immer  ungescheut 
Gleich  Bliichern  Denkmal  setzen. 
Von  Franzosen  hat  er  euch  befreit, 
Ich  von  Philister-netzen." 
Goethe  could  hardly  claim  to  be  the  apostle  of  public 
spirit ;  but  he  is  eminently  the  man  who  helps  us  to  rise  to 
a  lofty  point  of  observation,  so  that  we  may  see  things  in 
their  relative  proportions. 

The  most  interesting  chapters  in  the  description  of  the 
Fourth  Estate,"  which  concludes  the  volume,  are  those  on 
the  "Aristocratic  Proletariat"  and  the    Intellectual  Prolet- 
ariat."   The  Fourth  Estate  in  Germany,  says  Riehl,  has  its 
centre  of  gravity  not,  as  in  England  and  France,  in  the  day- 
laborers  and  factory  operatives,  and  still  less  in  the  degenerate 
'  peasantry.    In  Germany,  the  educated  proletariat  is  the  leaven 
that  sets  the  mass  in  fermentation ;  the  dangerous  classes  there 
go  about,  not  in  blouses,  but  in  frock-coats ;  they  begin  with 
the  impoverished  prince  g,nd  end  in  the  hungriest  litterateur. 
The  custom  that  all  the  sons  of  a  nobleman  shall  inherit 
their  father's  title  necessarily  goes  on  multiplying  that  class 
of  aristocrats  who  are  not  only  without  function,  but  without 
adequate  provision,  and  who  shrink  from  entering  the  ranks 
of  the  citizens  by  adopting  some  honest  calling.    The  younger 
son  of  a  prince,  says  Riehl,  is  usually  obliged  to  remain  with- 
out any  vocation ;  and  however  zealously  he  may  study  music, 
painting,  or  science,  he  can  never  be  a  regular  musician,  pain- 
ter, or  man  of  science;  his  pursuit  will  be  called  a  "passion," 
not  a  "calling,"  and  to  the  end  of  his  days  he  remains  a  dil- 
ettante,   "  But  the  ardent  pursuit  of  a  fixed  practical  calling 
can  alone  satisfy  the  active  man."    Direct  legislation  cannot 
remedy  this  evil.    The  inheritance  of  titles  by  younger  sons 
is  the  universal  custom,  and  custom  is  stronger  than  law. 
But  if  all  government  preference  for  the  "  aristocratic  prole- 
tariat" were  withdrawn,  the  sensible  men  among  them  would 
prefer  emigration,  or  the  pursuit  of  some  profession,  to  the 
Ixungry  distinction  of  a  title  without  rents. 


i62    THE  NATURAL  HISTORY  OF  GERMAN  LIFE : 


The  intellectual proletaires  Riehl  calls  the  "  church  militant" 
of  the  Fourth  Estate  in  Germany.  In  no  other  country  are 
they  so  numerous;  in  no  other  country  is  the  trade  in  mat- 
erial and  industrial  capital  so  far  exceeded  by  the  wholesale 
and  retail  trade,  the  traffic  and  the  usury,  in  the  intellectual 
capital  of  the  nation.  Germany  yields  more  intellectual  pro- 
duce than  it  can  use  and  pay  for. 

"This  over-production,  which  is  not  transient,  but  permanent,  nay, 
is  constantly  on  the  increase,  evidences  a  diseased  state  of  the  national 
industry,  a  perverted  application  of  industrial  powers,  and  is  a  far 
more  pungent  satire  on  the  national  condition  than  all  the  poverty  of 
operatives  and  peasants.  .  .  .  Other  nations  need  not  envy  us  the  pre- 
ponderance of  the  intellectual  proletariat  over  the  proletaires  of 
manual  labor.  For  man  more  easily  becomes  diseased  from  over- 
study  than  from  the  labor  of  the  hands ;  and  it  is  precisely  in  the 
intellectual  proletariat  that  there  are  the  most  dangerous  seeds  of 
disease.  This  is  the  group  in  which  the  opposition  between  earnings 
and  wants,  between  the  ideal  social  position  and  the  real,  is  the  most 
hopelessly  irreconcilable." 

We  must  unwillingly  leave  our  readers  to  make  acquaint- 
ance for  themselves  with  the  graphic  details  with  which  Riehl 
follow^  up  this  general  statement ;  but,  before  quitting  these 
admirable  volumes,  let  us  say,  lest  our  inevitable  omissions 
should  have  left  room  for  a  different  conclusion,  that  Riehl's 
conservatism 'is  not  in  the  least  tinged  with  the  partisanship 
of  a  class,  with  a  poetic  fanaticism  for  the  past,  or  with  the 
prejudice  of  a  mind  incapable  of  discerning  the  grander  evo- 
lution of  things  to  which  all  social  forms  are  but  temporarily 
subservient.  It  is  the  conservatism  of  a  clear-eyed,  practical, 
but  withal  large-minded  man — a  little  caustic,  perhaps,  now 
and  then  in  his  epigrams  on  democratic  doctiincdres  who  have 
their  nostrum  for  all  political  and  social  diseases,  and  on 
communistic  theories  which  he  regards  as  "  the  despair  ot 
the  individual  in  his  own  manhood,  reduced  to  a  system," 
but  nevertheless  able  and  willing  to  do  justice  to  the  elements 
of  fact  and  reason  in  every  shade  of  opinion  and  every  form 
of  effort.  He  is  as  far  as  possible  from  the  folly  of  suppos- 
ing that  the  sun  will  go  backward  on  the  dial  because  we  put 
the  hands  of  our  clock  backward ;  he  only  contends  against 
the  opposite  folly  of  decreeing  that  it  shall  be  mid-day,  while 
in  fact  the  sun  is  only  just  touching  the  mountain-tops,  and 
all  along  the  valley  men  are  stumbling  in  the  twilight. 


THREE  MONTHS  IN  WEIMAR. 


It  was  between  three  and  four  o'clock,  on  a  fine  morning 
in  August,  that,  after  a  ten  hours'  journey  from  Frankfort,  I 
awoke  at  the  Weimar  station.  No  tipsiness  can  be  more 
dead  to  all  appeals  than  that  which  comes  from  fitful  draughts 
of  sleep  on  a  railway  journey  by  night.  To  the  disgust  of 
your  wakeful  companions,  you  are  totally  insensible  to  the 
existence  of  your  umbrella,  and  to  the  fact  that  your  carpet- 
bag is  stowed  under  you  seat,  or  that  you  have  borrowed 
books  and  tucked  them  behind  the  cushion.  What's  the 
odds,  so  long  as  one  can  sleep  ?  "  is  your  philosophic  formula, 
and  it  is  not  until  you  have  begun  to  shiver  on  the  platform 
in  the  early  morning  air  that  you  become  alive  to  property 
and  its  duties—/.  to  the  necessity  of  keeping  a  fast  grip 
upon  it.  Such  was  my  condition  when  I  reached  the  station 
at  Weimar.  The  ride  to  the  town  thoroughly  roused  me,  all 
the  more  because  the  glimpses  I  caught  from  the  carriage 
window  were  in  startling  contrast  with  my  preconceptions. 
The  lines  of  houses  looked  rough  and  straggling,  and  were 
often  interrupted  by  trees  peeping  out  from  the  gardens 
behind.  At  last  we  stopped  before  the  Erbprinz,  an  inn  of 
long  standing,  in  the  heart  of  the  town,  and  were  ushered 
along  heavy-looking  in-and-out  corridors,  such  as  are  found 
only  in  German  inns,  into  rooms  which  overlooked  a  garden 
just  like  one  you  may  see  at  the  back  of  a  farmhouse  in 
many  an  English  village. 

A  walk  in  the  morning  in  search  of  lodgings  confirmed 
the  impression  that  Weimar  was  more  like  a  market-town 
than  the  precinct  of  a  court.  "  And  this  is  the  Athens  of 
the  North!"  we  said.  Materially  speaking,  it  is  more  like 
Sparta.  The  blending  of  rustic  and  civic  life,  the  indica- 
tions of  a  central  government  in  the  midst  of  very  primitive- 
looking  objects,  has  some  distant  analogy  with  the  condition 
of  old  Lacedaemon.  The  shops  are  most  of  them  such  as  you 
would  see  in  the  back  streets  of  an  English  provincial  town, 
and  the  commodities  on  sale  are  often  chalked  on  the  door- 


164 


THREE  MONTHS  IN  WEIMAR. 


posts.  A  loud  rumbling  of  vehicles  may  indeed  be  heard 
now  and  then ;  but  the  rumbling  is  loud,  not  because  the 
vehicles  are  many,  but  because  the  springs  are  few.  The 
inhabitants  seemed  to  us  to  have  more  than  the  usual  heavi- 
ness of  Germanity  ;  even  their  stare  was  slow,  like  that  of 
herbiverous  quadrupeds.  We  set  out  with  the  intention  of 
exploring  the  town,  and  at  every  other  turn  we  came  into  a 
street  which  took  us  out  of  the  town,  or  else  into  one  that 
led  us  back  to  the  market  from  which  we  set  out.  One's 
first  feeling  was,  How  could  Goethe  live  here  in  this  dull,  life- 
less village?  The  reproaches  cast  on  him  for  his  worldliness 
and  attachment  to  court  splendor  seemed  ludicrous  enough, 
and  it  was  inconceivable  that  the  stately  Jupiter,  in  a  frock- 
coat,  so  familiar  to  us  all  through  Rauch's  statuette,  could 
have  habitually  walked  along  these  rude  streets  and  among 
these  slouching  mortals.  Not  a  picturesque  bit  of  building 
was  to  be  seen;  there  was  no  quaintness,  nothing  to  remind 
one  of  historical  associations,  nothing  but  the  most  arid 
prosaism. 

This  was  the  impression  produced  by  a  first  morning's 
v;alk  in  Weimar — an  impression  which  very  imperfectly 
represents  what  Weimar  is,  but  which  is  worth  recording, 
because  it  is  true  as  a  sort  of  back  view.  Our  ideas  were 
considerably  modified  when,  in  the  evening,  we  found  our 
way  to  the  Belvedere  chaussee,  a  splendid  avenue  of  chest- 
nut-trees, two  miles  in  length,  reaching  from  the  town  to  the 
summer  residence  of  Belvedere  ;  when  we  saw  the  Schloss, 
and  discovered  the  labyrinthine  beauties  of  the  park ;  indeed 
every  day  opened  to  us  fresh  charms  in  this  quiet  little 
valley  and  its  environs.  To  any  one  who  loves  Nature  in 
her  gentle  aspects,  who  delights  in  the  chequered  shade  on 
a  summer  morning,  and  in  a  walk  on  the  corn-clad  upland 
at  sunset,  within  sight  of  a  little  town  nestled  among  the 
trees  below,  I  say — come  to  Weimar.  And  if  you  are  weary 
of  English  unrest,  of  that  society  of  eels  in  a  jar,"  where 
each  is  trying  to  get  his  head  above  the  other,  the  some- 
what stupid  well-bemg  of  the  Weimarians  will  not  be  an 
unwelcome  contrast,  for  a  short  time  at  least.  If  you  care 
nothing  about  Goethe  and  Schiller  and  Herder  and  Wieland, 
why,  so  much  the  worse  for  you — you  will  miss  many  inter- 
esting thoughts  and  associations ;  still,  Weimar  has  a  charm 
independent  of  these  great  names. 


THREE  MONTHS  IN  WEIMAR. 


t65 


First  among  all  its  attractions  is  the  Park,  which  would  be 
remarkably  beautiful  even  among  English  parks,  and  it  has 
one  advantage  over  all  these — namely,  that  it  is  without  a 
fence.  It  runs  up  to  the  houses,  and  far  out  into  the  corn- 
fields and  meadows,  as  if  it  had  a  '-sweet  will"  of  its  own, 
like  a  river  or  a  lake,  and  had  not  been  planned  and  planted 
by  human  will.  Through  it  flows  the  Ilm,  not  a  clear  stream , 
it  must  be  confessed,  but,  like  all  water,  as  Novalis  says,  "ai^. 
eye  to  the  landscape."  Before  we  came  to  Weimar  we  had 
had  dreams  of  boating  on  the  Ilm,  and  we  were  not  a  little 
amused  at  the  difference  between  this  vision  of  our  own  and 
the  reality.  A  few  water-fowl  are  the  only  navigators  of  the 
river,  and  even  they  seem  to  confine  themselves  to  one  spot, 
as  if  they  were  there  purely  in  the  interest  of  the  picturesque. 
The  real  extent  of  the  park  is  small,  but  the  walks  are  so 
ingeniously  arranged,  and  the  trees  are  so  luxuriant  and 
various,  that  it  takes  weeks  to  learn  the  turnings  and  wind- 
ings by  heart,  so  as  no  longer  to  have  the  sense  of  novelty. 
In.' the  warm  weather  our  great  delight  was  the  walk  which 
follows  the  course  of  the  Ilm,  and  is  over-arched  by  tall  trees 
with  patches  of  dark  moss  on  their  trunks,  in  rich  contrast  with 
the  transparent  green  of  the  delicate  leaves,  through  which 
the  golden  sunlight  played,  and  chequered  the  walk  before 
us.  On  one  side  of  this  walk  the  rocky  ground  rises  to.  the 
height  of  twenty  feet  or  more,  and  is  clothed  with  mosses 
and  rock-plants.  On  the  other  side  there  are,  every  now 
and  then,  openings,  breaks  in  the  continuity  of  shade,  which 
show  you  a  piece  of  meadow-land,  with  fine  groups  of  trees; 
and  at  every  such  opening  a  seat  is  placed  under  the  rock, 
where  you  may  sit  and  chat  away  the  sunny  hours,  or  listen 
to  those  delicate  sounds  which  one  might  fancy  came  from 
tiny  bells  worn  on  the  garment  of  Silence  to  make  us  aware 
of  her  invisible  presence.  It  is  along  this  walk  that  you 
come  upon  a  truncated  column,  with  a  serpent  twined  round 
it,  devouring  cakes,  placed  on  the  column  as  offerings,  a  bit 
Qf  rude  sculpture  in  stone.  The  inscription — Genio  loci — 
enlightens  the  learned  as  to  the  significance  of  this  symbol, 
but  the  people  of  Weimar,  unedified  by  classical  allusions, 
have  explained  the  sculpture  by  a  story  which  is  an  excell- 
ent example  of  a  modern  myth.  Once  on  a  time,  say  they, 
a  huge  serpent  infested  the  park,  and  evaded  all  attempts  to 
exterminate  him,  until  at  last  a  cunning  baker  made  some 


166  THREE  MONTHS  IN  WEIMAR. 

appetizing  cakes  which  contained  an  effectual  poison,  and 
placed  them  in  the  serpent's  reach,  thus  meriting  a  place 
with  Hercules,  Theseus,  and  other  monster  slayers.  Wei- 
mar, in  gratitude,  erected  this  column  as  a  memorial  of  the 
baker's  feat  and  its  own  deliverance.  A  little  farther  on  is 
the  Borkenhaus,  where  Carl  August  used  to  play  the  her- 
mit for  days  together,  and  from  which  he  used  to  telegraph 
to  Goethe  in  his  Gartenhaus.  Sometimes  we  took  our 
shady  walk  in  the  Stern,  the  oldest  part  of  the  park  planta- 
tions, on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  lingering  on  our  way 
to  watch  the  crystal  brook  which  hurries  on,  like  a  foolish 
young  maiden,  to  wed  itself  with  the  muddy  Ilm.  The 
Stern  (Star),  a  large  circular  opening  among  the  trees,  with 
walks  radiating  from  it,  has  been  thought  of  as  the  place  for 
the  projected  statues  of  Goethe  and  Schiller.  In  Ranch's 
model  for  these  statues  the  poets  are  draped  in  togas,  Goethe, 
who  was  considerably  the  shorter  of  the  two,  resting  his 
hand  on  Schiller's  shoulder;  but  it  has  been  wisely  deter- 
mined to  represent  them  in  their  "  habit  as  they  lived ;  "  ^o 
Rauch's  design  is  rejected.  Against  classical  idealizing  in 
portrait  sculpture,  Weimar  has  already  a  sufficient  warning 
in  the  colossal  statue  of  Goethe,  executed  after  Bettina's 
design,  which  the  readers  of  the  Correspondence  with  a 
Child"  may  see  engraved  as  a  frontispiece  to  the  second 
volume.  This  statue  is  locked  up  in  an  odd  structure,  stand- 
ing in  the  park,  and  looking  like  a  compromise  between  a 
churgh  and  a  summer-house.  (Weimar  does  not  shine  in 
its  buildings  ! )  How  little  real  knowledge  of  Goethe  must 
the  mind  have  that  could  wish  to  see  him  represented  as  a 
naked  Apollo,  with  a  Psyche  at  his  knee!  The  execution 
is  as  feeble  as  the  sentiment  is  false ;  the  Apollo  Goethe .  is 
a  caricature,  and  the  Psyche  is  simply  vulgar.  The  statue 
was  executed  under  Bettina's  encouragement,  in  the  hope 
that  it  would  be  bought  by  the  King  of  Prussia:  but  a 
breach  having  taken  place  between  her  and  her  royal  friend, 
a  purchaser  was  sought  in  the  Grand  Duke  of  Weimar,  who, 
after  transporting  it  at  enormous  expense  from  Italy,  wisely 
shut  it  up  where  it  is  seen  only  by  the  curious. 

As  autumn  advanced  and  the  sunshine  became  precious, 
we  preferred  the  broad  walk  on  the  higher  grounds  of  the 
park,  where  the  masses  of  trees  are  finely  disposed,  leaving 
wide  spaces  of  meadow,  which  extend  on  one  side  to  the 


THREE  MONTHS  IN  WEIMAR. 


167 


Belvedere  allee  with  its  avenue  of  chestnut-trees,  and  on  the 
\  other  to  the  little  cliffs  which  I  have  already  described  as 
\  forming  a  wall  by  the  walk  along  the  Ilm.  Exquisitely 
I  beautiful  were  the  graceful  forms  of  the  plane-trees,  thrown 
\  in  golden  relief  on  a  background  of  dark  pines.  Here  we 
\  used  to  turn  and  turn  again  in  the  autumn  afternoons,  at  first 
'  bright  and  warm,  then  sombre  with  low-lying  purple  clouds, 
and  chill  with  winds  that  sent  the  leaves  raining  from  the 
branches.  The  eye  here  welcomes,  as  a  contrast,  the  white 
facade  of  a  building  looking  like  a  small  Greek  temple, 
placed  on  the  edge  of  a  cliff,  and  you  at  once  conclude  it  to 
be  a  bit  of  pure  ornament,  a  device  to  set  off  the  landscape; 
but  you  presently  see  a  porter  seated  near  the  door  of  the 
basement  story,  beguiling  the  ennui  of  his  sinecure  by  a  book 
and  a  pipe,  and  you  learn  with  surprise  that  this  is  another 
retreat  for  ducal  dignity  to  unbend  and  philosophize  in. 
Singularly  ill-adapted  to  such  a  purpose  it  seems  to  beings 
not  ducal.  On  the  other  side  of  the  Ilm  the  park  is  bordered 
by  the  road  leading  to  the  little  village  of  Ober  Weimar, 
another  sunny  walk,  which  has  the  special  attraction  of 
taking  one  by  Goethe's  Gartenhaus,  his  first  residence  at 
Weimar.  Inside,  this  Gartenhaus  is  a  homely  sort  of  cottage, 
such  as  many  an  English  nobleman's  gardener  lives  in;  no 
furniture  is  left  in  it,  and  the  family  wish  to  sell  it.  Outside, 
its  aspect  became  to  us  like  that  of  a  dear  friend,  whose 
irregular  features  and  rusty  clothes  have  a  peculiar  charm. 
It  stands,  with  its  bit  of  garden  and  orchard,  on  a  pleasant 
slope,  fronting  the  west ;  before  it  the  park  stretches  one  of 
its  meadowy  openings  to  the  trees  which  fringe  the  Ilm,  and 
between  this  meadow  and  the  garden  hedge  lies  the  said 
road  to  Ober  Weimar.  A  grove  of  weeping  birches  some- 
times tempted  us  to  turn  out  of  this  road  up  to  the  fields  at 
the  top  of  the  slope,  on  which  not  only  the  Gartenhaus,  but 
several  other  modest  villas  are  placed.  From  this  little 
height  one  sees  to  advantage  the  plantations  of  the  park  in 
their  autumnal  coloring;  the  town,  with  its  steep-roofed 
church,  and  castle  clock-tower,  painted  a  gay  green ;  the 
bushy  line  of  the  Belvedere  chaussee,  and  Belvedere  itself 
peeping  on  an  eminence  from  its  nest  of  trees.  Here,  too, 
was  the  place  for  seeing  a  lovely  sunset,  such  a  sunset  as 
September  sometimes  gives  us,  when  the  western  horizon  is 
like  a  rippled  sea  of  gold,  sending  over  the  whole  hemisphere 


THREE  MONTHS  IN  WEIMAR. 


'  golden  vapors,  which,  as  they  near  the  east,  are  subdued  to  a 
deep  rose-color. 

The  Schloss  is  rather  a  stately,  ducal-looking  building, 
forming  three  sides  of  a  quadrangle.  Strangers  are  admitted 
to  see  a  suite  of  rooms  called  the  Dichter-Zimmer  (Poet's 
Rooms),  dedicated  to  Goethe,  Schiller,  and  Wieland.  The 
idea  of  these  rooms  is  really  a  pretty  one :'  in  each  of  them 
there  is  a  bust  of  the  poet  who  is  its  presiding  genius,  and 
the  walls  of  the  Schiller  and  Goethe  rooms  are  covered  with 
frescoes  representing  scenes  from  their  works.  The  Wieland 
room  is  much  smaller  than  the  other  two,  and  serves  as  an 
antechamber  to  them  ;  it  is  also  decorated  more  sparingly, 
but  the  arabesques  on  the  walls  are  very  tastefully  designed, 
and  satisfy  one  better  than  the  ambitious  compositions  from 
Goethe  and  Schiller. 

A  more  interesting  place  to  visitors  is  the  library,  which 
occupies  a  large  building  not  far  from  the  Schloss.  The  prin- 
cipal Saal^  surrounded  by  a  broad  gallery,  is  ornamented 
with  some  very  excellent  busts  and  some  very  bad  portraits. 
Of  the  busts,  the  most  remarkable  is  that  of  Gliick,  by  Houdon 
— a  striking  specimen  of  the  real  in  art.  The  sculptor  has 
given  every  scar  made  by  the  small-pox ;  he  has  left  the  nose 
as  pug  and  insignificant,  and  the  mouth  as  common,  as  Nat- 
ure made  them ;  but  then  he  has  done  what,  doubtless.  Nat- 
ure also  did — he  has  spread  over  those  coarsely  cut  features 
the  irradiation  of  genius.  A  specimen  of  the  opposite  style 
in  art  is  Trippel's  bust  of  Goethe  as  the  young  Apollo,  also 
fine  in  its  way.  It  was  taken  when  Goethe  was  in  Italy;  and 
in  the  Italianische  Reise,'*  mentioning  the  progress  of  the 
bust,  he  says  that  he  sees  little  likeness  to  himself,  but  is 
not  discontented  that  he  should  go  forth  to  the  world  e-s 
such  a  good-looking  fellow — hubscher  Bursch.  This  bust, 
however,  is  a  frank  idealization ;  when  an  artist  tells  us  that 
the  ideal  of  a  Greek  god  divides  his  attention  with  his  imme- 
diate subject,  we  are  warned.  But  one  gets  rather  irritated 
with  idealization  in  protrait  when,  as  in  Dannecker's  bust  of 
Schiller,  one  has  been  misled  into  supposing  that  Schiller's 
brow  was  square  and  massive,  while,  in  fact,  it  was  receding. 
We  say  this  partly  on  the  evidence  of  his  skull,  a  cast  of 
which  is  kept  in  the  library,  so  that  we  could  place  it  in 
juxtaposition  with  the  bust.  The  story  of  this  skull  is  curi- 
ous.   Wl^en  it  was  determined  to  disinter  Schiller's  remains,, 


THREE  MONTHS  IN  WEIMAR. 


169 


that  they  might  repose  in  company  with  those  of  Cari 
August  and  Goethe,  the  question  of  identification  was  found 
to  be  a  difficult  one,  for  his  bones  were  mingled  with  those 
of  ten  insignificant  fellow-mortals.  When,  however,  the 
eleven  skulls  were  placed  in  juxtaposition,  a  large  number  of 
persons  who  had  known  Schiller,  separately  and  successively 
fixed  upon  the  same  skull  as  his,  and  their  evidence  was 
clenched  by  the  discovery  that  the  teeth  of  this  skull  corres- 
ponded to  the  statement  of  Schiller's  servant,  that  his  master 
had  lost  no  teeth,  except  one,  which  he  specified.  Accord- 
ingly it  was  decided  that  this  was  Schiller's  skull,  and  the 
comparative  anatomist  Loder  was  sent  for  from  Jena  to  select 
the  bones  which  completed  the  skeleton.*  The  evidence 
certainly  leaves  room  for  a  doubt ;  but  the  receding  forehead 
of  the  skull  agrees  with  the  testimony  of  persons  who  knew 
Schiller,  that  he  had,  as  Ranch  said  to  us,  a  miserable  fore- 
head ;"  it  agrees,  also,  with  a  beautiful  miniature  of  Schiller, 
taken  when  he  was  about  twenty.  This  miniature  is  deeply 
interesting ;  it  shows  us  a  youth  whose  clearly  cut  features, 
with  the  mingled  fire  and  melancholy  of  their  expression, 
could  hardly  have  b^en  passed  with  indifference  ;  it  has  the 
lunger  Gdnsehals  (long  goose-neck)  which  he  gives  to  his  Karl 
Moor:  but  instead  of  the  black,  sparkling  eyes,  and  the 
gloomy,  overhanging,  bushy  eyebrows  he  chose  for  his  rob- 
ber hero,  it  has  the  fine,  wavy,  auburn  locks,  and  the  light- 
blue  eyes  which  belong  to  our  idea  of  pure  German  race. 
We  may  be  satisfied  that  we  know  at  least  the  form  of 
Schiller's  features,  for  in  this  particular  his  bust  and  por- 
traits are  in  striking  accordance ;  unlike  the  busts  and  por- 
traits of  Goethe,  which  are  a  proof,  if  any  were  wanted,  how 
inevitably  subjective  art  is,  even  when  it  professes  to  be 
purely  imitative — how  the  most  active  perception  gives  us 
rather  a  reflex  of  what  we  think  and  feel,  than  the  real  sum 
of  objects  before  us.  The  Goethe  of  Ranch  or  of  Schwantha- 
ler  is  widely  different  in  form,  as  well  as  expression,  from 
the  Goethe  of  Stieler ;  and  W^interberger,  the  actor,  who  knew 
Goethe  intimately,  told  us  that  to  him  not  one  of  all  the 
likenesses,  sculptured  or  painted,  seemed  to  have  more  than 

tell  this  story  from  my  recollection  of  Stahr's  account  in  his 
"  Weimar  und  Jena,"  an  account  which  was  confirmed  to  me  by  resi- 
dents in  Weimar  ;  but  as  I  have  not  the  book  by  me,  I  cannot  test  th# 
accuracy  of  my  memory 


170 


THREE  MONTHS  IN  WEIMAR. 


a  faint  resemblance  to  their  original.  There  is,  indeed,  one 
likeness,  taken  in  his  old  age,  and  preserved  in  the  Hbrary, 
which  is  startling  from  the  conviction  it  produces  of  close 
resemblance,  and  Winterberger  admitted  it  to  be  the  best  he 
had  seen.  It  is  a  tiny  miniature  painted  on  a  small  cup  of 
Dresden  china,  and  is  so  wonderfully  executed  that  a  magni- 
fying-glass  exhibits  the  perfection  of  its  texture  as  if  it  were 
a  flower  or  a  butterfly's  wing.  It  is  more  like  Stieler's  por- 
trait than  any  other ;  the  massive  neck,  unbent  though  with- 
ered, rises  out  of  his  dressing-gown,  and  supports  majestically 
a  head  from  which  one  might  imagine  (though,  alas!  it  never 
is  so  in  reality)  that  the  discipline  of  seventy  years  had 
purged  away  all  meaner  elements  than  those  of  the  sage  and 
the  poet — a  head  which  might  serve  as  a  type  of  sublime 
old  age.  Among  the  collection  of  toys  and  trash,  melan- 
choly records  of  the  late  Grand  Duke's  eccentricity,  which 
occupy  the  upper  rooms  of  the  library,  there  are  some  pre- 
cious relics  hanging  together  in  a  glass  case,  which  almost 
betray  one  into  sympathy  with  ''holy  coat"  worship.  They 
are— Luther's  gown,  the  coat  in  which  Gustavus  Adolphus 
was  shot,  and  Goethe's  court  coat  3.nd,Schlafrock.  What  a 
rush  of  thoughts  from  the  mingled  memories  of  the  passionate 
reformer,  the  heroic  warrior,  and  the  wise  singer ! 

The  only  one  of  its  great  men  to  whom  Weimar  has  at 
present  erected  a  statue  in  the  open  air  is  Herder.  His 
statue,  erected  in  1850,  stands  in  what  is  called  the  Herder 
Platz,  with  its  back  to  the  church  in  which  he  preached ;  in 
the  right  hand  is  a  roll  bearing  his  favorite  motto- — Licht, 
Liebe,  Leben  (Light,  Love,  Life),  and  on  the  pedestal  is  the 
inscription — Von  Deutschen  alter  Lander  (from  Germans  of 
all  lands).  This  statue,  which  is  by  Schaller  of  Munich,  is 
very  much  admired ;  but,  remembering  the  immortal  descrip- 
tion in  the  "Dichtung  and  W^ahrheit,"  of  Herder's  appear- 
ance when  Goethe  saw  him  for  the  first  time  at  Strasburg,  I 
was  disappointed  with  the  parsonic  appearance  of  the  statue, 
as  well  as  of  the  bust  in  the  library.  The  part  of  the 
town  which  imprints  itself  on  the  memory,  next  to  the  Herder 
Platz,  is  the  Markt,  a  cheerful  square,  made  smart  by  a  new 
Rath-haus.  Twice  a  week  it  is  crowded  with  stalls  and 
cauiitry  people;  and  it  is  the  very  pretty  custom  for  the 
band  to  play  in  the  balcony  of  the  Rath-haus  about  twenty 
:iiinutes  every  market-day  to  delight  the  ears  of  the  peasantry. 


THREE  MONTHS  IN  WEIMAR. 


171 


A  head-dress  worn  by  many  of  the  old  women,  and  here 
and  there  by  a  young  one,  is,  I  think,  pecuHar  to  Thuringia. 
I  Let  the  fair  reader  imagine  half  a  dozen  of  her  broadest 
'  French  sashes  dyed  black,  and  attached  as  streamers  to  the 
back  of  a  stiff,  black  skull-cap,  ornamented  in  front  with  a 
large  bow,  which  stands  out  like  a  pair  of  donkey's  ears ;  let 
her  further  imagine,  mingled  with  the  streamers  of  ribbon, 
equally  broad  pendants  of  a  thick  woollen  texture,  something 
like  the  fringe  of  an  urn  rug,  and  she  will  have  an  idea  of  the 
head-dress  in  which  I  have  seen  a  Thuringian  damsel  figure 
on  a  hot  summer's  day.  Two  houses  in  the  Markt  are 
pointed  out  as  those  from  which  Tetzel  published  his 
indulgences  and  Luther  thundered  against  them;  but  it  is 
difficult  to  one's  imagination  to  conjure  up  scenes  of  theologi- 
cal controversy  in  Weimar,  where,  from  princes  down  to 
pastry-cooks,  rationalism  is  taken  as  a  matter  of  course. 

Passing  along  the  Schiller-strasse,  a  broad,  pleasant  street, 
one  is  thrilled  by  the  inscription,  Hier  wohnte  Schiller,  over 
the  door  of  a  small  house  with  casts  in  its  bow-window. 
Mount  up  to  the  second  story  and  you  will  see  Schiller's 
study  very  nearly  as  it  was  when  he  worked  in  it.  It  is  a 
cheerful  room  with  three  windows,  two  towards  the  street, 
and  one  looking  on  a  little  garden  which  divides  his  house 
from  the  neighboring  one.  The  writing  table,  which  he 
notes  as  an  important  purchase  in  one  of  his  letters  to 
Kbrner,  and  in  one  of  the  drawers  of  which  he  used  to  keep 
rotten  apples  for  the  sake  of  their  scent,  stands  near  the  last- 
named  window,  so  that  its  light  would  fall  on  his  left  hand. 
On  another  side  of  the  room  is  his  piano,  with  his  guitar 
lying  upon  it;  and  above  these  hangs  an  ugly  print  of  an 
Italian  scene,  which  has  a  campanion  equally  ugly  on  another 
wall.  Strange  feelings  it  awakened  in  me  to  run  my  fingers 
over  the  keys  of  the  little  piano  and  call  forth  its  tones,  now 
so  queer  and  feeble,  like  those  of  an  invalided  old  woman, 
whose  voice  could  once  make  a  heart  beat  with  fond  passion 
or  soothe  its  angry  pulses  into  calm.  The  bedstead  on 
which  Schiller  died  has  been  removed  into  the  study  from 
the  small  bedroom  behind,  which  is  now  empty.  A  little 
table  is  placed  close  to  the  head  of  the  bed,  with  his  drink- 
ing-glass  upon  it,  and  on  the  wall  above  the  bedstead  there 
is  a  beautiful  sketch  of  him  lying  dead.  •  He  used  to  occupy 
the  whole  of  the  second  floor.    It  contains,  besides  the  study 


THREE  MONTHS  IN  WEIMAR. 


and  bedroom,  an  antechamber,  now  furnished  with  casts  and 
prints  on  sale,  in  order  to  remunerate  the  custodiers  of  the 
house,  and  a  salon  tricked  out,  since  his  death,  with  a 
symbohcal  cornice,  statues,  and  a  carpet  worked  by  the 
ladies  of  Weimar. 

Goethe's  house  is  much  more  important-looking,  but,  to 
English  eyes,  far  from  being  the  palatial  residence  which 
might  be  expected,  from  the  description  of  German  writers. 
The  entrance-hall  is  indeed  rather  imposing,  with  its  statues 
in  niches,  and  its  broad  staircase,  but  the  rest  of  the  house 
is  not  proportionately  spacious  and  elegant.  The  only  part 
of  the  house  open  to  the  public — and  this  only  on  a  Friday 
— is  the  principal  suite  of  rooms  which  contain  his  collection 
of  casts,  pictures,  cameos,  etc.  This  collection  is  utterly 
insignificant,  except  as  having  belonged  to  him;  and  one 
turns  away  from  bad  pictures  and  familiar  casts,  to  linger 
over  the  manuscript  of  the  wonderful  ''Rbmische  Elegein," 
written  by  himself  in  the  Italian  character.  It  is  to  be 
regretted  that  a  large  sum  offered  for  this  house  by  the  Ger- 
man Diet  was  refused  by  the  Goethe  family,  in  the  hope,  it 
is  said,  of  obtaining  a  still  larger  sum  from  that  mythical 
English  Croesus  always  ready  to  turn  fabulous  sums  into  dead 
capital,  who  haunts  the  imagination  of  Continental  people. 
One  of  the  most  fitting  tributes  a  nation  can  pay  to  its  great 
dead  is  to  make  their  habitation,  like  their  works,  a  public 
possession,  a  shrine  where  affectionate  reverence  may  be 
more  vividly  reminded  that  the  being  who  has  bequeathed 
to  us  immortal  thoughts  or  immortal  deeds,  had  to  endure 
the  daily  struggle  with  the  petty  details,  perhaps  with  the 
sordid  cares  of  this  working-day  world ;  and  it  is  a  sad  pity 
that  Goethe's  study,  bedroom,  and  library,  so  fitted  to  call 
up  that  kind  of  sympathy,  because  they  are  preserved  just 
as  he  left  them,  should  be  shut  out  from  all  but  the  specially 
privileged.  We  were  happy  enough  to  be  among  these,  to 
look  through  the  mist  of  rising  tears  at  the  dull  study  with 
its  two  small  windows,  and  without  a  single  object  chosen 
for  the  sake  of  luxury  or  beauty ;  at  the  dark  little  bedroom 
with  the  bed  on  which  he  died,  and  the  arm-chair  where  he 
took  his  morning  coffee  as  he  read;  at  the  library  with  its 
common  deal  shelves,  and  books  containing  his  own  paper- 
marks.  In  the  presence  of  this  hardy  simplicity,  the  contrast 
suggests  itself  of  the  study  at  Abbotsford,  with  its  elegant 


THREE  MONTHS  TN  WEIMAR. 


Gothic  fittings,  its  delicious  easy-chair,  and  its  oratory  of 
painted  glass. 

We  were  very  much  amused  at  the  privacy  with  which 
people  keep  their  shops  at  Weimar.  Some  of  them  have 
not  so  much  as  their  names  written  up ;  and  there  is  so  much  ' 
indifference  of  manner  towards  customers  that  one  might 
suppose  every  shopkeeper  was  a  salaried  functionary  employed 
by  government.  The  distribution  of  commodities,  too,  is 
carried  on  according  to  a  peculiar  Weimarian  logic;  we  , 
bought  our  lemons  at  a  ropemaker's,  and  should  not  have 
felt  ourselves  very  unreasonable  if  we  had  asked  for  shoes  at 
a  stationer's.  As  to  competition,  I  should  think  a  clever 
tradesman  or  artificer  is  almost  as  free  from  it  at  Weimar  as 
^sculapius  or  Vulcan  in  the  days  of  old  Olympus.  Here 
is  an  illustration.  Our  landlady's  husband  was  called  the 
^*susser  Rabenhorst,"  by  way  of  distinguishing  him  from  a 
brother  of  his  who  was  the  reverse  of  sweet.  This  Raben- 
horst who  was  not  sweet,  but  who  nevertheless  dealt  in 
sweets,  for  he  was  a  confectioner,  was  so  utter  a  rogue  that 
any  transaction  with  him  was  avoided  almost  ^as  much  as  if 
he  had  been  the  Evil  One  himself,  yet  so  clever  a  rogue  that 
he  always  managed  to  keep  on  the  windy  side  of  the  law. 
Nevertheless,  he  had  so  many  dainties  in  the  confectioner)^ 
line — so  viel  S'iissigkeiten  und  Leckerbissen — that  people  bent 
on  giving  a  fine  entertainment  were  at  last  constrained  to 
say,  "After  all,  I  must  go  to  Rabenhorst;''  and  so  he  got 
abundant  custom,  in  spite  of  general  detestation. 

A  very  fair  dinner  is  to  be  had  at  several  tables  d'hote  in 
Weimar  for  ten  or  twelve  groschen  (a  shilling  or  fifteen  pence). 
The  Germans  certainly  excel  us  in  their  Mehlspeise,  or  farin- 
aceous puddings,  and  in  their  mode  of  cooking  vegetables ; 
they  are  bolder  and  more  imaginative  in  their  combination 
of  sauces,  fruits,  and  vegetables  with  animal  food,  and  they 
are  faithful  to  at  last  one  principle  of  dietetics — variety.  The 
only  thing  at  table  we  have  any  pretext  for  being  supercilious 
about  is  the  quality  and  dressing  of  animal  food.  The  meat 
at  a  table  dhote  in  Thuringia,  and  even  Berlin,  except  in  the 
very  first  hotels,  bears  about  the  same  relation  to  ours  as 
horse-flesh  probably  bears  to  German  beef  and  mutton ;  and 
an  Englishman  with  a  bandage  over  his  eyes  would  often  be 
sorely  puzzled  to  guess  the  kind  of  flesh  he  was  eating.  For 
example,  the  only  flavor  we  could  ever  discern  in  hare,  which 


174 


THREE  MONTHS  IN  WEIMAR. 


is  a  very  frequent  dish,  was  that  of  the  more  or  less  disagree- 
able fat  which  predominated  in  the  dressing;  and  roast  meat 
seems  to  be  considered  an  extravagance  rarely  admissible. 
A  melancholy  sight  is  a  flock  of  Weimarian  sheep,  followed 
'  or  led  by  their  shepherd.  They  are  as  dingy  as  London 
sheep,  and  far  more  skinny;  indeed,  an  Englishman  who 
dined  with  us  said  the  sight  of  the  sheep  had  set  him  against 
mutton.  Still,  the  variety  of  dishes  you  get  for  ten  groschen 
,  is  something  marvellous  to  those  who  have  been  accustomed 
to  English  charges,  and  among  the  six  courses  it  is  not  a 
great  evil  to  find  a  dish  or  two  the  reverse  of  appetizing.  I 
suppose,  however,  that  the  living  at  tables  d'hote  gives  one 
no  correct  idea  43f  the  mode  in  which  the  people  live  at  home. 
The  basis  of  the  national  food  seems  to  be  raw  ham  and 
sausage,  with  a  copious  superstratum  of  Blaukrant,  Sauer- 
kraut, and  black  bread.  Sausage  seems  to  be  to  the  German 
what  potatoes  were  to  the  Irish — the  sine  qtta  non  of  bodily 
sustenance.  Goethe  asks  the  Frau  von  Stein  to  send  him  so 
eine  Wurst  when  he  wants  to  have  a  make-shift  dinner  away 
from  home ;  and  in  his  letters  to  Kestner  he  is  enthusiastic 
about  the  delights  of  dining  on  Blaukraut  and  Leberwurst 
(blue  cabbage  and  liver  sausage).  If  Kraut  and  Wurst  may 
be  called  the  solid  prose  of  Thuringian  diet,  fish  and  Kuchen 
(generally  a  heavy  kind  of  fruit  tart)  are  the  poetry :  the 
German  appetite  disports  itself  with  these  as  the  English 
appetite  does  with  ices  and  whipped  creams. 

At  the  beginning  of  August,  when  we  arrived  in  Weimar, 
almost  every  one  was  away — at  the  Baths,"  of  course — 
except  the  tradespeople.  As  birds  nidify  in  the  spring,  so 
Germans  wash  themselves  in  the  summer ;  their  Waschung- 
strieb  acts  strongly  only  at  a  particular  time  of  the  year ; 
during  all  the  rest,  apparently,  a  decanter  and  a  sugar-basin 
or  pie-dish  are  an  ample  toilet-service  for  them.  We  were 
quite  contented,  however,  that  it  was  not  yet  the  Weimar 
season,"  fashionably  speaking,  since  it  was  the  very  best 
time  for  enjoying  something  far  better  than  Weimar  gayeties 
— the  lovely  park  and  environs.  It  was  pleasant,  too,  to  see 
the  good  bovine  citizens  enjoying  life  in  their  quiet  fashion. 
Unlike  our  English  people,  they  take  pleasure  into  their 
calculations,  and  seem  regularly  to  set  aside  part  of  their  time 
for  recreation.  It  is  understood  that  something  is  to  be 
done  in  life  besides  business  and  house-wifery ;  the  womtTx 


THREE  MONTHS  IN  WEIMAR. 


175 


take  their  children  and  their  knitting  to  the  Erholung,  or 
walk  with  their  husbands  to  Belvedere,  or  in  some  other 
direction  where  a  cup  of  coffee  is  to  be  had.  The  Erholurg, 
by  the  way,  is  a  pretty  garden,  with  shady  walks,  abundant 
seats,  and  orchestra,  a  ball-room,  and  a  place  for  refresh- 
ments. The  higher  classes  are  subscribers  and  visitors  here 
as  well  as  the  bourgeoisie;  but  there  are  several  resorts  of  a 
similar  kind  frequented  by  the  latter  exclusively.  The 
reader  of  Goethe  will  remember  his  little  poem,  "  Die 
Lustigen  von  Weimar,"  which  still  indicates  the  round  of 
amusements  in  this  simple  capital :  the  walk  to  Belvedere  or 
Tiefurt;  the  excursion  to  Jena,  or  some  other  trip,  not  made 
expensive  by  distance ;  the  round  game  at  cards ;  the 
dance  ;  the  theatre  ;  and  so  many  other  enjoyments  to  be 
had  by  a  people  not  bound  to  give  dinner-parties  and  "  keep 
up  a  position." 

It  is  charming  to  see  how  real  an  amusement  the  theatre 
is  to  the  Weimar  people.  The  greater  number  of  places  are 
occupied  by  subscribers,  and  there  is  no  fuss  about  toilet  or 
escort.  The  ladies  come  alone,  and  slip  quietly  into  their 
places  without  need  of  "protection" — a  proof  of  civilization 
perhaps  more  than  equivalent  to  our  pre-eminence  in  patent 
locks  and  carriage  springs ;  and  after  the  performance  is  over 
you  may  see  the  same  ladies  following  their  servants,  with 
lanterns,  through  streets  innocent  of  gas,  in  which  an  oil-lamp, 
suspended  from  a  rope  slung  across  from  house  to  house, 
occasionally  reveals  to  you  the  shafts  of  a  cart  or  omnibus, 
conveniently  placed  for  you  to  run  upon  them. 

A  yearly  autumn  festival  at  Weimar  is  the  Vogelschiessen 
or  Bird-shooting ;  but  the  reader  must  not  let  his  imagination 
wander  at  this  word  into  fields  and  brakes.  The  bird  here 
concerned  is  of  wood,  and  the  shooters,  instead  of  wander- 
ing over  breezy  down  and  common,  are  shut  up,  day  after 
day,  in  a  room  clouded  with  tobacco-smoke,  that  they  may 
take  their  turn  at  shooting  with  the  rifle  from  the  window  of 
a  closet  about  the  size  of  a  sentinel's  box.  However,  this  is 
a  mighty  enjoyment  to  the  Thuringian  yeomanry,  and  an 
occasion  of  profit  to  our  friend  Punch,  and  other  itinerant 
performers;  for  while  the  Vogelschiesse?t  IdiSts,  a  sort  of  fair  is 
held  in  the  field  where  the  marksmen  assemble. 

Among  the  quieter  every-day  pleasures  of  the  Weimarians, 
perhaps  the  most  delightful  is  the  stroll  on  a  bright  afternoon 


176 


THREE  MONTHS  IN  WEIMAR. 


or  evening  to  the  Duke's  summer  residence  of  Belvedere, 
about  two  miles  from  Weimar.  As  I  have  said,  a  glorious 
avenue  of  chestnut  trees  leads  all  the  way  from  the  town  to 
the  entrance  of  the  grounds,  -which  are  open  to  all  the  world 
as  much  as  to  the  Duke  himself.  Close  to  the  palace  and 
its  subsidiary  buildings  there  is  an  inn,  for  the  accommoda- 
tion of  the  good  people  who  come  to  take  dinner  or  any 
other  meal  here,  by  way  of  holiday-making.  A  sort  of  pavil- 
ion stands  on  a  spot  commanding  a  lovely  view  of  Weimar 
and  its  valley,  and  here  the  Weimarians  constantly  come  on 
summer  and  autumn  evenings  to  smoke  a  cigar  or  drink  a 
cup  of  coffee.  In  one  wing  of  the  little  palace,  which  is  made 
smart  by  wooden  cupolas,  with  gilt  pinnacles,  there  is  a 
saloon,  which  I  recommend  to  the  imitation  of  tasteful  people 
in  their  country-houses.  It  has  no  decoration  but  that  of 
natural  foliage :  ivy  is  trained  at  regular  intervals  up  the  pure 
white  walls,  and  all  round  the  edge  of  the  ceiling,  so  as  to 
form  pilasters  and  a  cornice ;  ivy  again,  trained  on  trellis- work, 
forms  a  blind  to  the  window,  which  looks  towards  the  entrance- 
courts  ;  and  beautiful  ferns,  arranged  in  tall  baskets,  are  placed 
here  and  there  against  the  walls.  The  furniture  is  of  light 
cane-work.  Another  pretty  thing  here  is  the  Natur-Theater 
— a  theatre  constructed  with  living  trees,  trimmed  into  walls 
and  side  scenes.  We  pleased  ourselves  for  a  little  while  with 
thinking  that  this  was  one  of  the  places  where  Goethe  acted 
in  his  own  dramas,  but  we  afterwards  learned  that  it  was  not 
made  until  his  acting  days  were  over.  The  inexhaustible 
charm  of  Belvedere,  however,  is  the  grounds,  which  are  laid 
out  with  a  taste  worthy  of  a  first-rate  landscape-gardener. 
The  tall  and  graceful  limes,  plane-trees,  and  weeping  birches, 
the  little  basins  of  water  here  and  there,  with  fountains  play- 
ing in  the  middle  of  them,  and  with  a  fringe  of  broad-leaved 
plants,  or  other  tasteful  bordering  round  them,  the  gradual 
descent  towards  the  river,  and  the  hill  clothed  with  firs  and 
pines  on  the  opposite  side,  forming  a  fine  dark  background 
for  the  various  and  light  foliage  of  the  trees  that  ornament 
the  gardens — all  this  we  went  again  and  again  to  enjoy,  from 
the  time  when  everything  was  of  a  vivid  green  until  the  Vir- 
ginian creepers  which  festooned  the  silver  stems  of  the 
birches  were  bright  scarlet,  and  the  touch  of  autumn  had 
turned  all  the  green  to  gold.  One  of  the  -spots  to  linger  in 
is  at  a  semicircular  seat  against  an  artificial  rock,  on  which 


THREE  MONTHS  IN  WEIMAR. 


177 


are  placed  large  glass  globes  of  different  colors.  It  is  won- 
derful to  see  with  what  minute  perfection  the  scenery  around 
is  painted  in  these  globes.  Each  is  like  a  pre-RaphaeHte 
picture,  with  every  little  detail  of  gravelly  walk,  mossy  bank, 
and  delicately-leaved,  interlacing  boughs  presented  in  accur- 
ate miniature. 

In  the  opposite  direction  to  Belvedere  lies  Tiefurt,  with  its 
small  park  and  tiny  chateau,  formerly  the  residence  of  the 
Duchess  Amalia,  the  mother  of  Carl  August,  and  the  friend 
and  patroness  of  Wieland,  but  now  apparently  serving  as 
little  else  than  a  receptacle  for  the  late  Duke  Carl  Friedrich's 
rather  childish  collections.  In  the  second  story  there  is  a 
suite  of  rooms,  so  small  that  the  largest  of  them  does  not 
take  up  as  much  space  as  a  good  dining-table,  and  each  of 
these  doll-house  rooms  is  crowded  with  prints,  old  china, 
,and  all  sorts  of  knick-knacks  and  rococo  wares.  The  park  is 
a  little  paradise.  The  Ilm  is  seen  here  to  the  best  advantage : 
it  is  clearer  than  at  Weimar,  and  winds  about  gracefully 
between  the  banks,  on  one  side  steep,  and  curtained  with 
turf  and  shrubs,  or  fine  trees.  It  was  here,  at  a  point  where 
the  bank  forms  a  promontory  into  the  river,  that  Goethe  and 
his  court  friends  got  up  the  performance  of  an  operetta,  "  Die 
Fischerin,"  by  torchlight.  On  the  way  to  Tiefurt  lies  the 
Webicht,  a  beautiful  wood,  through  which  run  excellent 
carriage-roads  and  grassy  foot-paths.  It  was  a  rich  enjoyment 
to  skirt  this  wood  along  the  Jena  road,  and  see  the  sky 
arching  grandly  down  over  the  open  fields  on  the  other  side 
of  us,  the  evening  red  flushing  the  west  over  the  town,  and 
the  stars  coming  out  as  if  to  relieve  the  sun  in  its  watch ;  or 
to  take  the  winding  road  through  the  wood,  under  its  tall 
over-arching  trees,  now  bending  their  mossy  trunks  forward, 
now  standing  with  the  stately  erectness  of  lofty  pillars  ; .  or  to 
saunter  along  the  grassy  foot-paths,  where  the  sunlight 
streamed  through  the  fairy-like  foliage  of  the  silvery  barked 
birches. 

Stout  pedestrains  who  go  to  Wiemar  will  do  well  to  make 
a  walking  excursion,  as  we  did,  to  Ettersburg,  a  more  distant 
summer  residence  of  the  Grand  Duke,  interesting  to  us 
beforehand  as  the  scene  of  private  theatricals  and  sprees  in 
the  Goethe  days.  We  set  out  on  one  of  the  brightest  and 
hottest  mornings  that'  August  ever  bestowed,  and  it  required 
some  resolution  to  trudge  along  the  shadeless  chaussee,  which 
Cprrned  the  first  two  or  three  miles  of  our  way.  One 


178 


THREE  MONTHS  IN  WEIMAR. 


compensating  pleasure  was  the  sight  of  the  beautiful  moun- 
tain-ash trees  in  full  berry,  which  alternately  with  cherry-trees, 
border  the  road  for  a  considerable  distance.  At  last  we 
rested  from  our  broiling  walk  on  the  borders  of  a  glorious 
pine-wood,  so  extensive  that  the  trees  in  the  distance  form 
a  complete  wall  with  their  trunks,  and  so  give  one  a  twilight 
very  welcome  on  a  summer's  noon.  Under  these  pines  you 
tread  on  a  carpet  of  the  softest  moss,  so  that  you  hear  no 
sound  of  a  footstep,  and  all  is  as  solemn  and  still  as  in  the 
crypt  of  a  cathedral.  Presently  we  passed  out  of  the  pine- 
wood  into  one  of  limes,  beeches,  and  other  trees  of  transpar- 
ent and  light  foliage,  and  from  this  again  we  emerged  into 
the  open  space  of  the  Ettersburg  Park  in  front  of  the  Schloss, 
which  is  finely  placed  on  an  eminence  commanding  a 
magnificent  view  of  the  far-reaching  woods.  Prince  Piickler 
Muskau  has  been  of  service  here  by  recommending  openings 
to  be  made  in  the  woods,  in  the  taste  of  the  English  parks. 
The  Schloss,  which  is  a  favorite  residence  of  the  Grand 
Duke,  is  a  house  of  very  moderate  size,  and  no  pretension 
of  any  kind.  Its  stuccoed  walls,  and  doors  long  unac- 
quainted with  fresh  paint,  would  look  distressingly  shabby  to 
the  owner  of  a  villa  at  Richmond  or  Twickenham ;  but  much 
beauty  is  procured  here  at  slight  expense,  by  the  tasteful 
disposition  of  creepers  on  the  balustrades,  and  pretty  vases 
full  of  plants  ranged  along  the  steps,  or  suspended  in  the 
little  piazza  beneath  them.  A  walk  through  a  beech-wood 
took  us  to  the  Mooshutte^  in  front  of  which  stands  the  famous 
beech  from  whence  Goethe  denounced  Jacobi's  "  Woldemar." 
The  bark  is  covered  with  initials  cut  by  him  and  his  friends. 

People  who  only  allow  themselves  to  be  idle  under  the 
pretext  of  hydropathizing,  may  find  all  the  apparatus 
necessary  to  satisfy  their  conscience  at  Bercka,  a  village 
seated  in  a  lovely  valley  about  six  miles  from  Weimar.  Now 
and  then  a  Weimar  family  takes  lodgings  here  for  the  summer, 
retiring  from  the  quiet  of  the  capital  to  the  deeper  quiet  of 
Bercka ;  but  generally  the  place  seems  not  much  frequented. 
It  would  be  difficult  to  imagine  a  more  peace-inspiring  scene 
than  this  little  valley.  The  hanging  wood;  the  soft  coloring 
and  graceful  outline  of  the  uplands ;  the  village,  with  its  roofs 
and  spire  of  a  reddish-violet  hue,  muffled  in  luxuriant  trees ; 
the  white  Kurhaus  glittering  on  a  grassy  slope;  the  avenue 
of  poplars  contrasting  its  pretty  primness  with  the  wild, 
bushy  outline  of  the  wood-covered  hill,  which  rises  abruptly 


THREE  MONTHS  IN  WEIMAR. 


179 


from  the  smooth,  green  meadows ;  the  clear,  winding  stream, 
now  sparkHng  in  the  sun,  now  hiding  itself  under  soft  gray 
willows — all  this  makes  an  enchanting  picture.  The  walk 
to  Bercka  and  back  was  a  favorite  expedition  with  us  and  a 
few  Weimar  friends,  for  the  road  thither  is  a  pleasant  one, 
leading  at  first  through  open,  cultivated  fields,  dotted  here 
and  there  with  villages,  and  then  through  wooded  hills — the 
outskirts  of  the  Thuringian  Forest.  We  used  not  to  despise 
the  fine  plums  which  hung  in  tempting  abundance  by  the 
roadside ;  but  we  afterwards  found  that  we  had  been  deceived 
in  supposing  ourselves  free  to  pluck  them,  as  if  it  were  the 
golden  age,  and  that  we  were  liable  to  a  penalty  of  ten 
groschen  for  our  depredations. 

But  I  must  not  allow  myself  to  be  exhaustive  on  pleasures 
which  seem  monotonous  when  told,  though  in  enjoying 
them  one  is  as  far  from  wishing  them  to  be  more  various  as 
from  wishing  for  any  change  in  the  sweet  sameness  of 
successive  summer  days.  I  will  only  advise  the  reader  who 
has  yet  to  make  excursions  in  Thuringia  to  visit  Jena,  less 
for  its  traditions  than  for  its  fine  scenery,  which  makes  it,  as 
Goethe  says,  a  delicious  place,  in  spite  of  its  dull,  ugly  street ; 
and  exhort  him,  above  all,  to  brave  the  discomforts  of  a 
Postwagen  for  the  sake  of  getting  to  Ilmenau.  Here  he 
will  find  the  grandest  pine-clad  hills,  with  endless  walks 
under  their  solemn  shades;  beech-woods  where  every  tree  is 
a  picture;  an  air  that  he  will  breathe  with  as  conscious  a 
pleasure  as  if  he  were  taking  iced  water  on  a  hot  day ;  baths 
ad  libitum,  with  a  douche  lofty  and  tremendous  enough  to 
invigorate  the  giant  Cormoran ;  and,  more  than  all,  one  of 
the  most  interesting  relics  of  Goethe,  who  had  a  great  love 
for  Ilmenau.  This  is  the  small  wooden  house,  on  the  height 
called  the  Kickelhahn,  where  he  often  lived  in  his  long 
retirements  here,  and  where  you  may  see  written  by  his  own 
hand,  near  the  window-frame,  those  wonderful  lines — perhaps 
the  finest  expression  yet  given  to  the  sense  of  resignation 
inspired  by  the  sublime  calm  of  Nature — 
"  Ueber  alien  Gipfeln 
1st  Ruh, 

In  alien  Wipfeln 

Spiirest  du 

Kaum  einen  Hauch  ; 

Die  Vogelein  schweigen  im  Walde 

Warte  nur,  balde 

Ruhest  du  auch," 


ADDRESS  TO  WORKING  MEN  BY  FELIX  HOLT 


Fellow-workmen,  I  am  not  going  to  take  up  your  time 
by  complimenting  you.  It  has  been  the  fashion  to  compli- 
ment kings  and  other  authorities  when  they  have  come  into 
power,  and  to  tell  them  that,  under  their  wise  and  beneficent 
rule,  happiness  would  certainly  overflow  the  land.  But  the 
end  has  not  always  corresponded  to  that  beginning.  If  it 
were  true  that  we  who  work  for  wages  had  more  of  the  wis- 
dom and  virtue  necessary  to  the  right  use  of  power  than  has 
been  shown  by  the  aristocratic  and  mercantile  classes,  we 
should  not  glory  much  in  that  fact,  or  consider  that  it  carried 
with  it  any  near  approach  to  infallibility. 

In  my  opinion,  there  has  been  too  much  complimenting 
of  that  sort ;  and  whenever  a  speaker,  whether  he  is  one  of 
ourselves  or  not,  wastes  our  time  in  boasting  or  flattery,  I 
say,  let  us  hiss  him.  If  we  have  the  beginning  of  wisdom, 
which  is,  to  know  a  little  truth  about  ourselves,  we  know 
that  as  a  body  we  are  neither  very  wise  nor  very  virtuous. 
And  to  prove  this,  I  will  not  point  especially  to  our  own  habits 
and  doings,  but  to  the  general  state  of  the  country.  Any 
nation  that  had  within  it  a  majority  of  men — and  we  are  the 
majority — possessed  of  much  wisdom  and  virtue,  would  not 
tolerate  the  bad  practices,  the  commercial  lying  and  swind- 
ling, the  poisonous  adulteration  of  goods,  the  retail  cheating 
and  the  political  bribery,  which  are  carried  on  boldly  in  the 
midst  of  us.  A  majority  has  the  power  of  creating  a  public 
opinion.  We  could  groan  and  hiss  before  we  had  the  fran- 
chise: if  we  had  groaned  and  hissed  in  the  right  place,  if  we 
had  discerned  better  between  good  and  evil,  if  the  multitude 
of  us  artisans,  and  factory  hands,  and  miners,  and  laborers  of 
all  sorts,  had  been  skilful,  faithful,  well-judging,  industrious, 
sober — and  I  don't  see  how  there  can  be  wisdom  and  virtue, 
anywhere  without  those  qualities — we  should  have  made  an 
audience  that  would  have  shamed  the  other  classes  out  of 
their  share  in  the  national  vices.  We  should  have  had 
better  members  of  Parliament,  better  religious  teachers,  hon- 


BV  PELiX  HOLT, 


ester  tradesmen,  fewer  foolish  demagogues,  less  impudence 
in  infamous  and  brutal  men;  and  we  should  not  have  had 
nmong  us  the  abomination  of  men  calling  themselves  religi- 
ous while  living  in  splendor  on  ill-gotten  gains.  I  say,  it  is 
not  possible  for  any  society  in  which  there  is  a  very  large 
l)f  )dy  of  wise  and  virtuous  men  to  be  as  vicious  as  our  society 
i ; — to  have  as  low  a  standard  of  right  and  wrong,  to  have  so 
much  belief  in  falsehood,  or  to  have  so  degrading,  barbarous 
a  notion  of  what  pleasure  is,  or  of  what  justly  raises  a  man 
above  his  fellows.  Therefore,  let  us  have  done  with  this 
nonsense  about  our  being  much  better  than  the  rest  of  our 
countrymen,  or  the  pretence  that  that  was  a  reason  why  we 
ought  to  have  such  an  extension  of  the  franchise  as  has  been 
given  to  us.  The  reason  for  our  having  the  franchise,  as  I 
want  presently  to  show,  lies  somewhere  else  than  in  our 
personal  good  qualities,  and  does  not  in  the  least  lie  in  any 
high  betting  chance  that  a  delegate  is  a  better  man  than  a 
duke,  or  that  a  Sheffield  grinder  is  a  better  man  than  any 
one  of  the  firm  he  works  for. 

However,  we  have  got  our  franchise  now.  We  have  been 
sarcastically  called  in  the  House  of  Commons  the  future  mas- 
ters of  the  country;  and  if  that  sarcasm  contains  any  truth, 
it  seems  to  me  that  the  first  thing  we  had  better  think  of  is, 
our  heavy  responsibility ;  that  is  to  say,  the  terrible  risk  we 
run  of  working  mischief  and  missing  good,  as  others  have 
done  before  us.  Suppose  certain  men,  discontented  with  the 
irrigation  of  a  country  which  depended  for  all  its  prosperity 
on  the  right  direction  being  given  to  the  waters  of  a  great 
river,  had  got  the  management  of  the  irrigation  before  they 
were  quite  sure  how  exactly  it  could  be  altered  for  the  better, 
or  whether  they  could  command  the  necessary  agency  for 
such  an  alteration.  Those  men  would  have  a  difficult  and 
dangerous  business  on  their  hands  ;  and  the  more  sense,  feel- 
ing, and  knowledge  they  had,  the  more  they  would  be  likely 
to  tremble  rather  than  tg  triumph.  Our  situation  is  not  alto- 
gether unlike  theirs.  For  general  prosperity  and  well-being 
is  a  vast  crop,  that  like  the  corn  in  Egypt  can  be  come  at, 
not  at  all  by  hurried  snatching,  but  only  by  a  well-judged, 
patient  process  ;  and  whether  our  political  power  will  be  any 
good  to  us  now  we  have  got  it,  must  depend  entirely  on  the 
means  and  materials — the  knowledge,  ability,  and  honesty — 
we  have  at  command.    These  three  things  are  the  only  con- 


ADORES:^  TO  WORKliyG  MEN, 


ditions  on  which  we  can  get  any  lasting  benefit,  as  every 
clever  workman  among  us  knows:  he  knows  that  for  an 
article  to  be  worth  much  there  must  be  a  good  invention  or 
plan  to  go  upon,  there  must  be  well-prepared  material,  and 
there  must  be  skilful  and  honest  work  in  carrying  out  the  plan. 
And  by  this  test  we  may  try  those  who  want  to  be  our  lead- 
ers. Have  they  anything  to  offer  us  besides  indignant  talk  ? 
When  they  tell  us  we  ought  to  have  this,  that,  or  the  other 
thing,  can  they  explain  to  us  any  reasonable,  fair,  safe  way 
of  getting  it?  Can  they  argue  in  favor  of  a  particular  change 
oy  showing  us  pretty  closely  how  the  change  is  likely  to 
work?  I  don't  want  to  decry  a  just  indignation;  on  the 
contrary,  I  should  like  it  to  be  more  thorough  and  general. 
A  wise -man,  more  than  two  thousand  years  ago,  when  he 
was  asked  what  would  most  tend  to  lessen  injustice  in  the 
world,  said,  "That  every  bystander  should  feel  as  indignant 
at  a  wrong  as  if  he  himself  were  the  sufferer."  Let  us  cher- 
ish such  indignation.  But  the  long-growing  evils  of  a  great 
nation  are  a  tangled  business,  asking  for  a  good  deal  more 
than  indignation  in  order  to  be  got  rid  of.  Indignation  is  a 
fine  war-horse,  but  the  war-horse  must  be  ridden  by  a  man: 
it  must  be  ridden  by  rationality,  skill,  courage,  armed  with 
the  right  weapons,  and  taking  definite  aim. 

We  have  reason  to  be  discontented  with  many  things, 
and,  looking  back  either  through  the  history  of  England  to 
much  earlier  generations,  or  to  the  legislation  and  adminis- 
tration of  later  times,  we  are  justified  in  saying  that  many  of 
the  evils  under  which  our  country  now  suffers  are  the  con- 
sequences of  folly,  ignorance,  neglect,  or  self-seeking  in 
those  who,  at  different  times,  have  wielded  the  powers  of 
rank,  office  and  money.  But  the  more  bitterly  we  feel  this, 
the  more  loudly  we  utter  it,  the  stronger  is  the  obligation 
we  lay  on  ourselves  to  beware  lest  we  also,  by  a  too  hasty 
wresting  of  measures  which  seem  to  promise  an  immediate 
partial  relief,  make  a  worse  time  of  it  for  our  own  generation, 
and  leave  a  bad  inheritance  to  our  children.  The  deepest 
curse  of  wrong-doing,  whether  of  the  foolish  or  wicked  sort, 
is  that  its  effects  are  difficult  to  be  undone.  I  suppose 
there  is  hardly  anything  more  to  be  shuddered  at  than  that 
part  of  the  history  of  disease  which  shows  how,  when  a  man 
injures  his  constitution  by  a  life  of  vicious  excess,  his  chil- 
dren and  grandchildren  inherit  diseased  bodies  and  minds. 


BY  FELIX  HOLT. 


183 


and  how  the  effects  of  that  unhappy  inheritance  continue  to 
sprea^d  beyond  our  calculation.  This  is  only  one  example  of 
the  law  by  which  human  lives  are  linked  together :  another 
example  of  what  we  complain  of  when  we  point  to  our  pau- 
perism, to  the  brutal  ignorance  of  multitudes  among  our  fel- 
low-countrymen, to  the  weight  of  taxation  laid  on  us  by 
blamable  wars,  to  the  wasteful  channels  made  for  the  public 
money,  to  the  expense  and  trouble  of  getting  justice,  and 
call  these  the  effects  of  bad  rule.  This  is  the  law  that  we 
all  bear  the  yoke  of,  the  law  of  no  man's  making,  and  which 
no  man  can  undo.  Everybody  now  sees  an  example  of  it 
in  the  case  of  Ireland.  We  who  are  living  now  are  sufferers 
by  the  wrong-doing  of  those  who  lived  before  us;  we  are 
sufferers  by  each  other's  wrong-doing;  and  the  children 
who  come  after  us  are  and  will  be  sufferers  from  the  same 
causes.  Will  any  man  say  he  doesn't  care  for  that  law — it 
is  nothing  to  him — what  he  wants  is  to  better  himself? 
With  what  face,  then,  will  he  complain  of  any  injury  ?  If  he 
says  that  in  politics  or  in  any  sort  of  social  action  he  will 
not  care  to  know  what  are  likely  to  be  the  consequences  to 
others  besides  himself,  he  is  defending  the  very  worst  doings 
that  have  brought  about  his  discontent.  He  might  as  well 
say  that  there  is  no  better  rule  needful  for  men  than  that 
each  should  tug  and  rive  for  what  will  please  him,  without 
caring  how  that  tugging  will  act  on  the  fine,  widespread  net- 
work of  society  in  which  he  is  fast  meshed,  If  any  man 
taught  that  as  a  doctrine,  we  should  know  him  for  a  fool. 
But  there  are  men  who  act  upon  it:  every  scoundrel,  for 
example,  whether  he  is  a  rich  religious  scoundrel  who  lies 
and  cheats  on  a  large  scale,  and  will  perhaps  come  and  ask 
you  to  send  him  to  Parliament,  or  a  poor  pocket-picking 
scoundrel,  who  will  steal  your  loose  pence  while  you  are  lis- 
tening round  the  platform.  None  of  us  are  so  ignorant  as 
not  to  know  that  a  society,  a  nation,  is  held  together  by  just 
the  opposite  doctrine  and  action — by  the  dependence  of  men 
on  each  other  and  the  sense  they  have  of  a  common  interest 
in  preventing  injury.  And  we  working  men  are,  I  think,  of 
all  classes  the  last  that  can  afford  to' forget  this;  for  if  we  did 
we  should  be  much  like  sailors  cutting  away  the  timbers  of 
our  own  ship  to  warm  our  grog  with.  For  what  else  is  the 
meaning  of  our  Trades-unions?  What  else  is  the  meaning 
of  every  flag  we  carry,  every  procession  we  make,  every 


i84 


ADDRESS  TO  WORKING  MEN, 


crowd  we  collect  for  the  sake  of  making  some  protest  on 
behalf  of  our  body  as  receivers  of  wages,  if  not  this;  that 
it  is  our  interest  to  stand  by  each  other,  and  that  this  being 
the  common  interest,  no  one  of  us  will  try  to  make  a  good 
bargain  for  himself  without  considering  what  will  be  good 
for  his  fellows?  And  every  member  of  a  union  believes 
that  the  wider  he  can  spread  his  union,  the  stronger  and 
surer  will  be  the  effect  of  it.  So  I  think  I  shall  be  borne 
out  in  saying  that  a  working  man  who  can  put  two  and  two 
together,  or  take  three  from  four  and  see  what  will  be  the 
remainder,  can  understand  that  a  society,  to  be  well  off,  must 
be  made  up  chiefly  of  men  who  consider  the  general  good 
as  well  as  their  own. 

Well,  but  taking  the  world  as  it  is — and  this  is  one  way 
we  must  take  it  when  we  want  to  find  out  how  it  can  be 
improved — no  society  is  made  up  of  a  single  class:  society 
stands  before  us  like  that  wonderful  piece  of  life,  the  human 
body,  with  all  its  various  parts  depending  on  one  another, 
and  with  a  terrible  liability  to  get  wrong  because  of  that 
delicate  dependence.  We  all  know  how  many  diseases  the 
human  body  is  apt  to  suffer  from,  and  how  difficult  it  is  even 
for  the  doctors  to  find  out  exactly  where  the  seat  or  begin- 
ning of  the  disorder  is.  That  is  because  the  body  is  made 
up  of  so  many  various  parts,  all  related  to  each  other,  or 
likely  all  to  feel  the  effect  if  any  one  of  them  goes  wrong. 
It  is  somewhat  the  same  with  our  old  nations  or  societies. 
No  society  ever  stood  long  in  the  world  without  getting  to 
be  composed  of  different  classes.  Now,  it  is  all  pretence  to 
say  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  Class  Interest.  It  is  clear 
that  if  any  particular  number  of  men  get  a  particular  benefit 
from  any  existing  institution,  they  are  likely  to  band  together, 
in  order  to  keep  up  that  benefit  and  increase  it,  until  it  is 
perceived  to  *be  unfair  and  injurious  to  another  large  number, 
who  get  knowledge  and  strength  enough  to  set  up  a  resist- 
ance ;  and  this,  again,  has  been  part  of  the  history  of  every 
great  society  since  history  began.  But  the  simple  reason 
for  this  being,  that  any  large  body  of  men  is  likely  to  have 
more  of  stupidity,  narrowness,  and  greed  than  of  farsighted- 
ness and  generosity,  it  is  plain  that  the  number  who  resist 
unfairness  and  injury  are  in  danger  of  becoming  injurious  in 
their  turn.  And  in  this  way  a  justifiable  resistance  has 
become  a  damaging  convulsion,  making  everything  worse 


BY  FELIX  HOLT. 


instead  of  better.  This  has  been  seen  so  often  that  we  ought 
to  profit  a  little  by  the  experience.  So  long  as  there  is  self- 
ishness in  men ;  so  long  as  they  have  not  found  out  for  them- 
selves institutions  which  express  and  carry  into  practice  the 
truth  that  the  highest  interest  of  mankind  must  at  last 
be  a  con^mon  and  not  a  divided  interest;  so  long  as  the 
gradual  operation  of  steady  causes  has  not  made  that  truth 
a  part  of  every  man's  knowledge  and  feeling,  just  as  we  now 
not  only  know  that  it  is  good  for  our  health  to  be  cleanly, 
but  feel  that  cleanliness  is  only  another  word  for  comfort, 
which  is  the  under-side  or  lining  of  all  pleasure;  so  long,  I 
say,  as  men  wink  at  their  own  knowingness,  or  hold  their 
heads  high,  because  they  have  got  an  advantage  over  their 
fellows,  so  long  Class  Interest  will  be  in  danger  of  making 
itself  felt  injuriously.  No  set  of  men  will  get  any  sort  of 
power  without  being  in  danger  of  wanting  more  than  their 
right  share.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  just  as  certain  that 
no  set  of  men  will  get  angry  at  having  less  than  their  right 
share,  and  set  up  a  claim  on  that  ground,  without  falling  into 
just  the  same  danger  of  exacting  too  much,  and  exacting 
it  in  wrong  ways.  It's  human  nature  we  have  got  to  work 
with  all  around,  and  nothing  else.  That  seems  like  saying 
something  very  commonplace — nay,  obvious;  as  if  one 
should  say  that  where  there  are  hands  there  are  mouths. 
Yet,  to  hear  a  good  deal  of  the  speechifying  and  to  see  a 
good  deal  of  the  action  that  goes  forward,  one  might  sup- 
pose it  was  forgotten. 

But  I  come  back  to  this :  that  in  our  old  society,  there 
are  old  institutions,  and  among  the  various  distinctions  and 
inherited  advantages  of  classes,  which  have  shaped  them- 
selves along  with  all  the  wonderful  slow-growing  system  of 
things  made  up  of  our  laws,  our  commerce,  ahd  our  stores 
of  all  sorts,  whether  in  material  objects,  such  as  buildings 
and  machinery,  or  in  knowledge,  such  as  scientific  thought 
and  professional  skill.  Just  as  in  that  case  I  spoke  of  before, 
the  irrigation  of  a  country,  which  tnust  absolutely  have  its 
water  distributed  or  it  will  bear  no  crop ;  there  are  the  old 
channels,  the  old  banks,  and  the  old  pumps,  which  must  be 
used  as  they  are  until  new  and  better  have  been  prepared, 
or  the  structure  of  the  old  has  been  gradually  altered.  But 
it  would  be  fool's  work  to  batter  down  a  pump  only  because 
a  better  might  be  made,  when  you  had  no  machinery  ready 


186 


ADDRESS  TO  WORKING  MEN, 


for  a  new  one :  it  would  be  wicked  work,  if  villages  lost  their 
crops  by  it.  Now,  the  only  safe  way  by  which  society  can  be 
steadily  improved  and  our  worst  evils  reduced,  is  not  by  any 
attempt  to  do  away  directly  with  the  actually  existing  class 
distinctions  and  advantages,  as  if  everybody  could  have  the 
same  sort  of  work,  or  lead  the  same  sort  of  life  (which  none 
of  my  hearers  are  stupid  enough  to  suppose),  but  by  the 
turning  of  Class  Interests  into  Class  Functions  or  duties. 
What  I  mean  is,  that  each  class  should  be  urged  by  the  sur- 
rounding conditions  to  perform  its  particular  work  under  the 
strong  pressure  of  responsibility  to  the  nation  at  large ;  that 
our  public  affairs  should  be  got  into  a  state  in  which  there 
should  be  no  impunity  for  foolish  or  faithless  conduct.  In 
this  way,  the  public  judgment  would  sift  out  incapability  and 
dishonesty  from  posts  of  high  charge,  and  even  personal 
ambition  would  necessarily  become  of  a  worthier  sort,  since 
the  desires  of  the  most  selfish  men  must  be  a  good  deal 
shaped  by  the  opinions  of  those  around  them;  and  for  one 
person  to  put  on  a  cap  and  bells,  or  to  go  about  dishonest 
or  paltry  ways  of  getting  rich  that  he  may  spend  a  vast  sum 
of  money  in  having  more  finery  than  his  neighbors,  he  must 
be  pretty  sure  of  a  crowd  that  will  applaud  him.  Now, 
changes  can  only  be  good  in  proportion  as  they  help  to 
bring  about  this  sort  of  result :  in  proportion  as  they  put 
knowledge  in  the  place  of  ignorance,  and  fellow-feeling  in 
the  place  of  selfishness.  In  the  course  of  that  substitution, 
class  distinctions  must  inevitably  change  their  character,  and 
represent  the  varying  Duties  of  men,  not  their  varying 
Interests.  But  this  end  will  not  come  by  impatience.  "Day 
will  not  break  the  sooner  because  we  get  up  before  the  twi- 
light." Still  less  will  it  come  by  mere  undoing,  or  change 
merely  as  change.  And,  moreover,  if  we  believe  that  it 
would  be  unconditionally  hastened  by  our  getting  the  fran- 
chise, we  should  be  what  I  call  superstitious  men,  believing 
in  magic,  or  the  production  of  a  result  by  hocus-pocus.  Our 
getting  the  franchise  will  greatly  hasten  that  good  end  in  pro- 
portion only  as  every  one  of  us  has  the  knowledge,  the 
foresight,  the  conscience,  that  will  make  him  well-judging 
and  scrupulous  in  the  use  of  it.  The  nature  of  things  in  this 
world  has  been  determined  for  us  beforehand,  and  in  such  a 
way  that  no  ship  can  be  expected  to  sail  well  on  a  difficult 
voyage,  and  reach  the  right  port,  unless  it  is  well  manned ; 


BY  FELIX  HOLT. 


187 


the  nature  of  the  winds  and  the  waves,  of  the  timbers,  the 
sails  and  the  cordage,  will  not  accommodate  itself  to  drunken, 
mutinous  sailors. 

You  will  not  suspect  me  of  wa;nting  to  preach  any  cant  to 
you,  or  of  joining  in  the  pretence  that  everything  is  in  a 
fine  way,  and  need  not  be  made  better.  What  I  am  striving 
to  keep  in  our  minds  is  the  care,  the  precaution,  with  which 
we  should  go  about  making  things  better,  so  that  the  public 
order  may  not  be  destroyed,  so  that  no  fatal  shock  may  be 
given  to  this  society  of  ours,  this  living  body  in  which  our 
lives  are  bound  up.  After  the  reform  bill  of  1832  I  was  in 
an  election  riot,  which  showed  me  clearly,  on  a  small  scale, 
what  public  disorder  must  always  be;  and  I  have  never  for- 
gotten that  the  riot  was  brought  about  chiefly  by  the  agency 
of  dishonest  men  who  professed  to  be  on  the  people's  side. 
Now,  the  danger  hanging  over  change  is  great,  just  in 
proportion  as  it  tends  to  produce  such  disorder  by  giving 
any  large  number  of  ignorant  men,  whose  notions  of  what 
is  good  are  of  a  low  and  brutal  sort,  the  belief  that  they  have 
got  power  into  their  hands,  and  may  do  pretty  much  as  they 
like.  If  any  one  can  look  round  us  and  say  that  he  sees  no 
signs  of  any  such  danger  now,  and  that  our  national  condi- 
tion is  running  along  like  a  clear,  broadening  stream,  safe 
not  to  get  choked  with  mud,  I  call  him  a  cheerful  man ;  per- 
haps he  does  his  own  gardening,  and  seldom  takes  exercise 
far  away  from  home.  To  us  who  have  no  gardens,  and  often 
walk  abroad,  it  is  plain  that  we  can  never  get  into  a  bit  of 
a  crowd  but  we  must  rub  clothes  with  a  set  of  Roughs,  who 
have  the  worst  vices  of  the  worst  rich — who  are  gamblers, 
sots,  libertines,  knaves,  or  else  mere  sensual  simpletons  and 
victims.  They  are  the  ugly  crop  that  has  sprung  up  w^hile 
the  stewards  have  been  sleeping ;  they  are  the  multiplying 
brood  begotten  by  parents  who  have  been  left  without  all 
teaching  save  that  of  a  too  craving  body,  without  all  well- 
being  save  the  fading  delusions  of  drugged  beer  and  gin. 
They  are  the  hideous  margin  of  society,  at  one  edge  drawing 
towards  it  the  undesigning,  ignorant  poor,  at  the  other  dark- 
ening imperceptibly  into  the  lowest  criminal  class.  Here  is 
one  of  the  evils  which  cannot  be  got  rid  of  quickly,  and 
against  which  any  of  us  who  have  got  sense,  decency,  and 
instruction  have  need  to  watch.  That  these  degraded  fel- 
low-nien  could  really  get  the  mastery  in  a  persistent  disob^- 


i88 


ADDRESS  TO  WORKING  MEN, 


dience  to  the  laws  and  in  a  struggle  to  subvert  order,  I  do 
not  believe;  but  wretched  calamities  would  come  from  the 
very  beginning  of  such  a  struggle,  and  the  continuance  of  it 
would  be  a  civil  war,  in  which  the  inspiration  on  both  sides 
might  soon  cease  to  be  even  a  false  notion  of  good,  and 
might  become  the  direct  savage  impulse  of  ferocity.  We 
have  all  to  see  to  it  that  we  do  not  help  to  rouse  what  I  may 
call  the  savage  beast  in  the  breast  of  our  generation — that 
we  do  not  help  to  poison  the  nation's  blood,  and  make  richer 
provision  for  bestiality  to  come.  We  know  well  enough 
that  oppressors  have  sinned  this  way — that  oppression  has 
notoriously  made  men  mad  ;  and  we  are  determined  to  resist 
oppression.  But  let  us,  if  possible,  show  that  we  can  keep 
sane  in  our  resistance,  and  shape  our  means  more  and  more 
reasonably  towards  the  least  harmful,  and,  therefore,  the 
speediest,  attainment  of  our  end.  Let  us,  I  say,  show  that 
our  spirits  are  too  strong  to  be  driven  mad,  but  can  keep 
that  sober  determination  which  alone  gives  mastery  over  the 
adaptation  of  means.  And  a  first  guarantee  of  this  sanity 
will  be  to  act  as  if  we  understood  that  the  fundamental  duty 
of  a  government  is  to  preserve  order,  to  enforce  obedience 
of  the  laws.  It  has  been  held  hitherto  that  a  man  can  be 
depended  on  as  a  guardian  of  order  only  when  he  has  much 
money  and  comfort  to  lose.  But  a  better  state  of  things 
would  be,  that  men  who  had  little  money  and  not  much 
comfort  should  still  be  guardians  of  order,  because  they  had 
sense  to  see  that  disorder  would  do  no  good,  and  had  a  heart 
of  justice,  pity,  and  fortitude,  to  keep  them  from  making 
more  misery  only  because  they  felt  some  misery  themselves. 
There  are  thousands  of  artisans  who  have  already  shown 
this  fine  spirit,  and  have  endured  much  with  patient  heroism. 
If  such  a  spirit  spread,  and  penetrated  us  all,  we  should  soon 
become  the  masters  of  the  country  in  the  best  sense  and  to 
the  best  ends.  For,  the  public  order  being  preserved,  there 
can  be  no  government  in  future  that  will  not  be  determined 
by  our  insistance  on  our  fair  and  practicable  demands.  It 
is  only  by  disorder  that  our  demands  will  be  choked,  that  we 
shall  find  ourselves  lost  among  a  brutal  rabble,  with  all  the 
intelligence  of  the  country  opposed  to  us,  and  see  govern- 
ment in  the  shape  of  guns  that  will  sweep  us  down  in  the 
ignoble  martyrdom  of  fools. 

It  has  b^en  a  too  common  notion  that  to  insist  much  on 


BV  F£UX  MOLT, 


the  preservation  of  order  is  the  part  of  a  selfish  aristocracy 
and  a  selfish  commercial  class,  because  among  these,  in  the 
nature  of  things,  have  been  found  the  opponents  of  change. 
I  am  a  Radical;  and,  what  is  more,  I  am  not  a  Radical  virith 
a  title,  or  a  French  cook,  or  even  an  entrance  into  fine  society. 
I  expect  great  changes  and  I  de-sire  them.  But  I  don't 
expect  them  to  come  in  a  hurry,  by  mere  inconsiderate 
sweeping.  A  Hercules  with  a  big  besom  is  a  fine  thing  for 
a  filthy  stable,  but  not  for  weeding  a  seed  bed,  where  his 
besom  would  soon  make  a  barren  floor. 

That  is  old-fashioned  talk,  some  one  may  say.  We  know 
all  that. 

Yes,  when  things  are  put  in  an  extreme  way,  most  people 
think  .they  know  them  ;  but,  after  all,  they  are  comparatively 
few  who  see  the  small  degrees  by  which  those  extremes  are 
arrived  at,  or  have  the  resolution  and  self-control  to  resist 
the  little  impulses  by  which  they  creep  on  surely  towards  a 
fatal  end.  Does  anybody  set  out  meaning  to  ruin  himself, 
or  to  drink  himself  to  death,  or  to  waste  his  life  so  that  he 
becomes  a  despicable  old  man,  a  superannuated  nuisance,  like 
a  fly  in  winter?  Yet  there  are  plenty,  of  whose  lot  this  is  the 
pitiable  story.  Well,  now,  supposing  us  all  to  have  the  best 
intentions,  we  working  men,  as  a  body,  run  some  risk  of  bring- 
ing evil  on  the  nation  in  th^  unconscious  manner — half- 
hurrying,  half-pushed  in  a  jostling  march  towards  an  end  we 
are  not  thinking  of  For  just  as  there  are  many  things  which 
we  know  better  and  feel  much  more  strongly  than  the  richer, 
softer-handed  classes  can  know  or  feel  them,  so  there  are 
many  things — many  precious  benefits — which  we,  by  the 
very  fact  of  our  privations,  our  lack  of  leisure  and  instruction, 
are  not  so  likely  to  be  aware  of  and  take  into  our  account. 
Those  precious  benefits  form  a  chief  part  of  what  I  may  call 
the  common  estate  of  society;  a  wealth  over  and  above  build- 
ings, machinery,  produce,  shipping,  and  so  on,  though  closely 
connected  with  these;  a  wealth  of  a  more  delicate  kind, 
that  we  may  more  unconsciously  bring  into  danger,  doing 
harm  and  not  knowing  that  we  do  it.  I  mean  that  treasure 
of  knowledge,  science,  poetry,  refinement  of  thought,  feeling, 
and  manners,  great  memories,  and  the  interpretation  of  great 
records,  which  is  carried  on  from  the  minds  of  one  generation 
to  the  minds  of  another.  This  is  something  distinct  from  the 
indulgences  of  luxury  and  the  pursuit  of  vain  finery;  and  one 


190  ADDRESS  TO  WORKING  MEN, 

of  the  ^./irdships  in  the  lot  of  working  men  is  that  they  have 
been  for  the  most  part  shut  out  from  siiaring  in  this  treasure. 
It  can  make  a  man's  Hfe  very  great,  very  full  of  delight, 
though  he  has  no  smart  furniture  and  no  horses;  it  also  yields 
a  great  deal  of  discovery  that  corrects  error,  and  of  invention 
that  lessens  bodily  pain,  and  must  at  last  make  life  easier  for 
all. 

Now,  tne  security  of  this  treasure  demands,  not  only  the 
preservation  of  order,  but  a  certain  patience  on  our  part  with 
many  institutions  and  facts  of  various  kinds,  especially  touch- 
ing the  accumulation  of  wealth,  which,  from  the  light  we 
stand  in,  we  are  more  likely  to  discern  the  evil  than  the 
good  of.  It  is  constantly  the  task  of  practical  wisdom  not 
to  say,  ''This  is  good,  and  I  will  have  it,"  but  to  say,  "This 
is  the  less  of  two  unavoidable  evils,  and  I  will  bear  it."  And 
this  treasure  of  knowledge,  which  consists  in  the  fine  activity, 
the  exalted  vision  of  many  minds,  is  bound  up  at  present  with 
conditions  which  have  much  evil  in  them.  Just  as  in  the 
case  of  material  wealth  and  its  distribution  we  are  obliged 
to  take  the  selfishness  and  weaknesses  of  human  nature  into 
account,  and,  however  we  insist  that  men  might  act  better, 
are  forced,  unless  we  are  fanatical  simpletons,  to  consider 
how  they  are  likely  to  act;  so  in  this  matter  of  the  wealth 
that  is  carried  in  men's  minds^  we  have  to  reflect  that  the  too 
absolute  predominance  of  a  class  whose  wants  have  been  of 
a  common  sort,  who  are  chiefly  struggling  to  get  better  and 
more  food,  clothing,  shelter,  and  bodily  recreation,  may  lead 
to  hasty  measures  for  the  sake  of  having  things  more  fairly 
shared,  which,  even  if  they  did  not  fail  of  their  object,  would 
at  last  debase  the  life  of  the  nation.  Do  anything  which 
will  throw  the  classes  who  hold  the  treasures  of  knowledge 
— nay,  I  may  say,  the  treasure  of  refined  needs — into  the 
background,  cause  them  to  withdraw  from  public  affairs, 
stop  too  suddenly  any  of  the  sources  by  which  their  leisure 
and  ease  are  furnished,  rob  them  of  the  chances  by  which 
they  may  be  influential  and  pre-eminent,  and  you  do  some- 
thing as  short-sighted  as  the  acts  of  France  and  Spain  when 
in  jealousy  and  wrath,  not  altogether  unprovoked,  they  drove 
from  among  them  races  and  classes  that  held  the  traditions 
of  handicraft  and  agriculture.  You  injure  your  own  inheri- 
tance and  the  inheritance  of  your  children.  You  may  truly 
say  that  this  which  I  call  the  common  estate  of  society  has 


BY  FELIX  HOLT. 


been  anything  but  common  to  you ;  but  the  same  may  be  said, 
by  many  of  us  of  the  sunlight  and  the  air,  of  the  sky  and  the 
fields,  of  parks  and  holiday  games.  Nevertheless,  that  these 
blessings  exist  makes  life  worthier  to  us,  and  urges  us  the  more 
to  energetic,  likely  means  of  getting  our  share  in  them ;  and  I 
say,  let  us  watch  carefully  lest  we  do  anything  to  lessen  this 
treasure  which  is  held  in  the  minds  of  men,  while  we  exert 
ourselves  first  of  all,  and  to  the  very  utmost,  that  we  and 
our  children  may  share  in  all  its  benefits.  Yes;  exert  our- 
selves to  the  utmost  to  break  the  yoke  of  ignorance.  If  we 
demand  more  leisure,  more  ease  in  our  lives,  let  us  show  that 
we  don't  deserve  the  reproach  of  wanting  to  shirk  that  indus- 
try which,  in  some  form  or  other,  every  man,  whether  rich 
or  poor,  should  feel  himself  as  much  bound  to  as  he  is  bound 
to  decency.  Let  us  show  that  we  want  to  have  some  time 
and  strength  left  to  us,  that  we  may  use  it,  not  for  brutal 
indulgence,  but  for  the  rational  exercise  of  the  faculties 
which  make  us  men.  Without  this  no  political  measures 
can  benefit  us.  No  political  institution  will  alter  the  nature 
of  Ignorance,  or  hinder  it  from  producing  vice  and  misery. 
Let  Ignorance  start  how  it  will,  it  must  run  the  same  round 
of  low  appetites,  poverty,  slavery,  and  superstition.  Some 
of  us  know  this  well — nay,  I  will  say,  feel  it;  for  knowledge 
of  this  kind  cuts  deep;  and  to  us  it  is  one  of  the  most  pain- 
ful facts  belonging  to  our  condition  that  there  are  numbers 
of  our  fellow-workmen  who  are  so  far  from  feeling  in  the 
same  way,  that  they  never  use  the  imperfect  opportunities 
already  offered  them  for  giving  their  children  some  school- 
ing but  turn  their  little  ones  of  tender  age  into  bread- 
winners, often  at  cruel  tasks,  exposed  to  the  horrible  infection 
of  childish  vice.  Of  course,  the  causes  of  these  hideous  things 
go  a  long  way  back.  Parents'  misery  has  made  parents' 
wickedness.  But  we,  who  are  still  blessed  with  the  hearts 
of  fathers  and  the  consciences  of  men — we  who  have  some 
knowledge  of  the  curse  entailed  on  broods  of  creatures  in 
human  shape,  whose  enfeebled  bodies,  and  dull,  perverted 
minds  are  mere  centres  of  uneasiness,  in  whom  even  appe- 
tite is  feeble,  and  joy  impossible — I  say  we  are  bound  to 
use  all  the  means  at  our  command  to  help  in  putting  a  stop 
to  this  horror.  Here,  it  seems  to  me,  is  a  way  in  which  we 
may  use  extended  co-operation  among  us  to  the  most 
momentous  of  all  purposes,  and  make  conditions  of  enrol- 


192  ADDRESS  TO  WORKING  MEN, 

ment  that  would  strengthen  all  educational  measures.  It  is 
true  enough  that  there  is  a  low  sense  of  parental  duties  in 
the  nation  at  large,  and  that  numbers  who  have  no  excuse 
in  bodily  hardship  seem  to  think  it  a  light  thing  to  beget 
children — to  bring  human  beings,  with  all  their  tremendous 
possibilities,  into  this  difficult  world — and  then  take  little 
heed  how  they  are  disciplined  and  furnished  for  the  perilous 
journey  they  are  sent  on  without  any  asking  of  their  own. 
This  is  a  sin  shared  in  more  or  less  by  all  classes ;  but  there 
are  sins  which,  like  taxation,  fall  the  heaviest  on  the  poorest, 
and  none  haVe  such  galling  reasons  as  we  working  men  to 
try  and  rouse  to  the  utmost  the  feeling  of  responsibility  in 
fathers  and  mothers.  We  have  been  urged  into  co-operation 
by  the  pressure  of  common  demands.  In  war  men  need 
each  other  more ;  and  where  a  given  point  has  to  be  defended, 
fighters  inevitably  find  themselves  shoulder  to  shoulder.  So 
fellowship  grows;  so  grow  the  rules  of  fellowship,  which 
gradually  shape  themselves  to  thoroughness  as  the  idea  of 
a  common  good  becomes  more  complete.  We  feel  a  right 
to  say,  If  you  will  be  one  of  us,  you  must  make  such  and 
such  a  contribution,  you  must  renounce  such  and  such  a 
separate  advantage,  you  must  set  your  face  against  such  and 
such  an  infringement.  If  we  have  any  false  ideas  about  oui 
common  good,  our  rules  will  be  wrong,  and  we  shall  be 
co-operating  to  damage  each  other.  But  now,  here  is  a  part 
of  our  good,  without  which  everything  else  we  strive  for 
will  be  worthless — I  mean  the  rescue  of  our  children.  Let 
us  demand  from  the  members  of  our  Unions  that  they  fulfil 
their  duty  as  parents  in  this  definite  matter,  which  rules  can 
reach.  Let  us  demand  that  they  send  their  children  to 
school,  so  as  not  to  go  on  recklessly  breeding  a  moral  pesti- 
lence among  us,  just  as  strictly  as  we  demand  that  they  pay 
their  contributions  to  a  common  fund,  understood  to  be  for 
a  common  benefit.  While  we  watch  our  public  men  let  us 
wktch  one  another  as  to  this  duty,  which  is  also  public, 
and  more  momentous  even  than  obedience  to  sanitary  regu- 
lations. While  we  resolutely  declare  against  the  wickedness 
in  high  places,  let  us  set  ourselves  also  against  the  wicked- 
ness in  low  places;  not  quarreling  which  came  first,  or  which 
is  the  worst  of  the  two — not  trying  to  settle  the  miserable 
precedence  of  plague  or  famine,  but  insisting  unflinchingly 
on  remedies  once  ascertained,  and  summoning  those  who 


BY  FELIX  HOLT. 


193 


hold  the  treasure  of  knowledge  to  remember  that  they  hold 
it  in  trust,  and  that  with  them  lies  the  task  of  searching  for 
new  remedies,  and  finding  the  right  methods  of  applying 
them. 

To  find  right  remedies  and  right  methods!  Here  is  the 
great  function  of  knowledge:  here  the  life  of  one  man  may 
make  a  fresh  era  straight  away,  in  which  a  sort  of  suffering 
that  has  existed  shall  exist  no  more.  For  the  thousands  of 
years,  down  to  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century  since 
Christ,  that  human  limbs  had  been  hacked  and  amputated, 
nobody  knew  how  to  stop  the  bleeding  except  by  searing 
the  ends  of  the  vessels  with  red-hot  iron.  But  then  came  a 
man  named  Ambrose  Pare,  and  said,  "Tie  up  the  arteries!" 
That  was  a  fine  word  to  utter.  It  contained  the  statement 
of  a  method — a  plan  by  which  a  particular  evil  was  forever 
assuaged.  Let  us  try  to  discern  the  men  whose  words  carry 
that  sort  of  kernel,  and  choose  such  men  to  be  our  guides 
and  representatives — not  choose  platform  swaggerers,  who 
bring  us  nothing  but  the  ocean  to  make  our  broth  with. 

To  get  the  chief  power  into  the  hands  of  the  wisest,  which 
means  to  get  our  life  regulated  according  to  the  truest  prin- 
ciples mankind  is  in  possession  of,  is  a  problem  as  old  as  the 
very  notion  of  wisdom.  The  solution  comes  slowly,  because 
men  collectively  can  only  be  made  to  embrace  principles, 
and  to  act  on  them,  by  the  slow,  stupendous  teaching  of  the 
world's  events.  Men  will  go  on  planting  potatoes,  and 
nothing  else  but  potatoes,  till  a  potato  disease  comes  and 
forces  them  to  find  out  the  advantage  of  a  varied  crop. 
Selfishness,  stupidity,  sloth,  persist  in  trying  to  adapt  the 
world  to  their  desires,  till  a  time  comes  when  the  world 
manifests  itself  as  too  decidedly  inconvenient  to  them.  Wis- 
dom stands  outside  of  man  and  urges  itself  upon  him,  like 
the  marks  of  the  changing  seasons,  before  it  finds  a  home 
within  him,  directs  his  actions,  and  from  the  precious  effects 
of  obedience  begets  a  corresponding  love. 

But  while  still  outside  of  us,  wisdom  often  looks  terrible, 
and  wears  strange  forms,  wrapped  in  the  changing  conditions 
of  a  struggling  world.  It  wears  now  the  form  of  wants  and 
just  demands  in  a  great  multitude  of  British  men;  wants  and 
demands  urged  into  existence  by  the  forces  of  a  maturing 
world.  And  it  is  in  virtue  of  this — in  virtue  of  this  presence 
of  wisdom  on  our  side  as  a  mighty  fact,  physical  and  moral, 
which  must  enter  into  and  shape  the  thoughts  and  actions 


194  ADDRESS  TO  WORKING  MEN,  BY  FELIX  HOLT, 


of  mankind — that  we  working  men  have  obtained  the  suffrage. 
Not  because  we  are  an  excellent  multitude,  but  because  we 
are  a  needy  multitude. 

But  now,  for  our  own  part,  we  have  seriously  to  consider 
this  outside  wisdom  which  lies  in  the  supreme  unalterable 
nature  of  things,  and  watch  to  give  it  a  home  within  us  and 
obey  it.  If  the  claims  of  the  unendowed  multitude  of  work- 
ing men  hold  within  them  principles  which  must  shape  the 
future,  it  is  not  less  true  that  the  endowed  classes,  in  their 
inheritance  from  the  past,  hold  the  precious  material  without 
which  no  worthy,  noble  future  can  be  moulded.  Many  of 
the  highest  uses  of  life  are  in  their  keeping;  and  if  privilege 
has  often  been  abused,  it  has  also  been  the  nurse  of  excel- 
lence. Here  again  we  have  to  submit  ourselves  to  the  great 
law  of  inheritance.  If  we  quarrel  with  the  way  in  which  the 
labors  and  earnings  of  the  past  have  been  preserved  and 
handed  down,  we  are  just  as  bigoted,  just  as  narrow,  just  as 
wanting  in  that  religion  which  keeps  an  open  ear  and  obedient 
mind  to  the  teachings  of  fact,  as  we  accuse  those  of  being 
who  quarrel  with  the  new  truth  and  new  needs  which  are 
disclosed  in  the  present.  The  deeper  insight  we  get  into 
the  causes  of  human  trouble,  and  the  ways  by  which  men  are 
made  better  and  happier,  the  less  we  shall  be  inclined  to  the 
unprofitable  spirit  and  practice  of  reproaching  classes  as 
such  in  a  wholesale  fashion.  Not  all  the  evils  of  our 
condition  are  such  as  we  can  justly  blame  others  for;  and,  I 
repeat,  many  of  them  are  such  as  no  change  of  institutions 
can  quickly  remedy.  To  discern  between  the  evils  that 
energy  can  remove  and  the  evils  that  patience  must  bear, 
makes  the  difference  between  manliness  and  childishness, 
between  good  sense  and  folly.  And,  more  than  that,  with- 
out such  discernment,  seeing  that  we  have  grave  duties 
towards  our  own  body  and  the  country  at  large,  we  can 
hardly  escape  acts  of  fatal  rashness  and  injustice. 

I  am  addressing  a  mix^d  assembly  of  workmen,  and  some 
of  you  may  be  as  well  or  better  fitted  than  I  am  to  take  up 
this  office.  But  they  will  not  think  it  amiss  in  me  that  I 
have  tried  to  bring  together  the  considerations  most  likely 
to  be  of  service  to  us  in  preparing  ourselves  for  the  use  of 
our  new  opportunities.  I  have  avoided  touching  on  special 
questions.  The  best  help  towards  judging  well  on  these  is  to 
approach  them  in  the  right  temper,  without  vain  expectation, 
and  with  a  resolution  which  is  mixed  with  temperance. 


LEAVES  FROM  A  NOTE  BOOK. 


Authorship. 

To  lay  down  in  the  shape  of  practical  moral  rules  courses 
of  conduct  only  to  be  made  real  by  the  rarest  states  of  motive 
and  disposition,  tends  not  to  elevate,  but  to  degrade  the  gen- 
eral standard,  by  turning  that  rare  attainment  from  an  object 
of  admiration  into  an  impossible  prescription,  against  which 
the  average  nature  first  rebels  and  then  flings  out  ridicule. 
It  is  for  art  to  present  images  of  a  lovelier  order  than  the 
actual,  gently  winning  the  affections,  and  so  determining  the 
taste.  But  in  any  rational  criticism  of  the  time  which  is 
meant  to  guide  a  practical  reform,  it  is  idle  to  insist  that  action 
ought  to  be  this  or  that,  without  considering  how  far  the 
outward  conditions  of  such  change  are  present,  even  suppos- 
ing the  inward  disposition  towards  it.  Practically,  we  must 
be  satisfied  to  aim  at  something  short  of  perfection — and  at 
something  very  much  further  off  it  in  one  case  than  in  another. 
While  the  fundamental  conceptions  of  morality  seem  as  sta- 
tionary through  ages  as  the  laws  of  life,  so  that  a  moral 
manual  written  eighteen  centuries  ago  still  admonishes  us 
that  we  are  low  in  our  attainments,  it  is  quite  otherwise  with 
the  degree  to  which  moral  conceptions  have  penetrated  the 
various  forms  of  social  activity,  and  made  what  may  be  called 
the  special  conscience  of  each  calling,  art,  or  industry.  While 
on  some  points  of  social  duty  public  opinion  has  reached  a 
tolerably  high  standard,  on  others  a  public  opinion  is  not  yet 
born;  and  there  are  even  some  functions  and  practices  with 
regard  to  which  men  far  above  the  line  in  honorableness  of 
nature  feel  hardly  any  scrupulosity,  though  their  consequent 
behavior  is  easily  shown  to  be  as  injurious  as  bribery,  or  any 
•ther  slowly  poisonous  .procedure  which  degrades  the  social 
vitality. 

Among  those  callings  which  have  not  yet  acquired  any- 
thing near  a  full-grown  conscience  in  the  public  mind  is 
Authorship.    Yet  the  changes  brought  about  by  the  spread 


196  LEA  VES  FROM  A  NO  TE-BOOK. 

• 

of  instruction  and  the  consequent  struggles  of  an  uneasy 
ambition,  are,  or  at  least  might  well  be,  forcing  on  many- 
minds  the  need  of  some  regulating  principle  with  regard  to 
the  publication  of  intellectual  products,  which  would  override 
the  rule  of  the  market :  a  principle,  that  is,  which  should  be 
derived  from  a  fixing  of  the  author's  vocation  according  to 
those  characteristics  in  which  it  differs  from  the  other  bread- 
winning  professions.  Let  this  be  done,  if  possible,  without 
any  cant,  which  would  carry  the  subject  into  Utopia,  away 
from  existing  needs.  The  guidance  wanted  is  a  clear  notion 
of  what  should  justify  men  and  women  in  assuming  public 
authorship,  and  of  the  way  in  which  they  should  be  deter- 
mined by  what  is  usually  called  success.  But  the  forms  of 
authorship  must  be  distinguished;  journalism,  for  example, 
carrying  a  necessity  for  that  continuous  production  which  in 
other  kinds  of  writing  is  precisely  the  evil  to  be  fought 
against,  and  judicious,  careful  compilation,  which  is  a  great 
public  service,  holding  in  its  modest  diligence  a  guarantee 
against  those  deductions  of  vanity  and  idleness  which  draw 
many  a  young  gentleman  into  reviewing,  instead  of  the 
sorting  and  copying  which  his  small  talents  could  not  rise  to 
with  any  vigor  and  completeness. 

A  manufacturer  goes  on  producing  calicoes  as.  long  and  as 
fast  as  he  can  find  a  market  for  them ;  and  in  obeying  this 
indication  of  demand  he  gives  his  factory  its  utmost  useful- 
ness to  the  world  in  general,  and  to  himself  in  particular. 
Another  manufacturer  buys  a  new  invention  of  some  light 
kind  likely  to  attract  the  public  fancy,  is  successful  in  finding 
a  multitude  who  will  give  their  testers  for  the  transiently 
desirable  commodity,  and,  before  the  fashion  is  out,  pockets 
a  considerable  sum :  the  commodity  was  Colored  with  a  green 
which  had  arsenic  in  it,  that  damaged  the  factory  workers 
and  the  purchasers.  What  then?  These,  he  contends  (or 
does  not  know  or  care  to  contend),  are  superficial  effects, 
which  it  is  folly  to  dwell  upon  while  we  have  epidemic  diseases 
and  bad  government. 

The  first  manufacturer  we  will  suppose  blameless.  Is  an 
author  simply  on  a  par  with  him,  as  to  the  rules  of  produc- 
tion? 

The  author's  capital  is  his  brain-power — power  of  inven- 
tion, power  of  writing.  The  manufacturer's  capital,  in  fort- 
unate cases,  is  being  continually  reproduced  and  increased. 


LEAVES  FROM  A  NOTE-BOOK. 


197 


Here  is  the  first  grand  difference  between  the  capital  which 
is  turned  into  calico,  and  the  brain  capital  which  is  turned 
into  literature.  The  calico  scarcely  varies  in  appropriateness 
of  quality,  no  consumer  is  in  danger  of  getting  too  much 
of  it,  and  neglecting  his  boots,  hats,  and  flannel  shirts  in 
consequence.  That  there  should  be  large  quantities  of  the 
same  sort  in  the  calico  manufacture  is  an  advantage:  the 
sameness  is  desirable,  and  nobody  is  likely  to  roll  his  person 
in  so  many  folds  of  calico  as  to  become  a  mere  bale  of  cotton 
goods,  and  nullify  his  senses  of  hearing  and  touch,  while  his 
morbid  passion  for  Manchester  shirtings  makes  him  still  cry 
More ! "  The  wise  manufacturer  gets  richer  and  richer, 
and  the  consumers  he  supplies  have  their  real  wants  satisfied 
and  no  more. 

Let  it  be  taken  as  admitted  that  all  legitimate  social 
activity  must  be  beneficial  to  others  besides  the  agent.  To 
,  write  prose  or  verse  as  a  private  exercise  and  satisfaction  is 
not  social  activity;  nobody  is  culpable  for  this  any  more 
than  for  learning  other  people's  verse  by  heart,  if  he  does 
not  neglect  his  proper  business  in  consequence.  If  the  exer- 
cise made  him  sillier  or  secretly  more  self-satisfied,  that,  to 
be  sure,  would  be  a  roundabout  way  of  injuring  society;  for 
though  a  certain  mixture  of  silliness  may  lighten  existence, 
we  have  at  present  more  than  enough. 

But  man  or  woman  who  publishes  writings  inevitably 
assumes  the  office  of  teacher  pr  influencer  of  the  public 
mind.  Let  him  protest  as  he  will  that  he  only  seeks  to 
amuse,  and  has  no  pretension  to  do  more  than  while  away 
an  hour  of  leisure  or  weariness — "  the  idle  singer  of  an  empty 
day" — he  can  no  more  escape  influencing  the  moral  taste, 
and  with-  it  the  action  of  the  intelligence,  than  a  setter  of 
fashions  in  furniture  and  dress  can  fill  the  shops  with  his 
designs,  and  leave  the  garniture  of  persons  and  houses  unaf- 
fected by  his  industry. 

For  a  man  who  has  a  certain  gift  of  writing  to  say,  "  I  will 
make  the  most  of  it  while  the  public  likes  my  wares,  as  long 
as  the  market  is  open  and  I  am  able  to  supply  it  at  a  money 
profit— such  profit  being  the  sign  of  liking" — he  should 
have  a  belief  that  his  wares  have  nothing  akin  to  the  arsenic 
green  in  them,  and  also  that  his  continuous  supply  is  secure 
trom  a  degradation  in  quality  which  the  habit  of  consumption 
encouraged  in  the  buyers  may  hinder  them  from  marking 


198 


LEAVES  FROM  A  NOTE-BOOK. 


their  sense  of  by  rejection ;  so  that  they  complain,  but  pay, 
and  read  while  they  complain.  Unless  he  has  that  belief, 
he  is  on  a  level  with  the  manufacturer  who  gets  rich  by  fancy 
wares  covered  with  arsenic  green.  He  really  cares  for  noth- 
ing but  his  income.  He  carries  on  authorship  on  the  prin- 
ciple of  the  gin-palace. 

And  bad  literature  of  the  sort  called  amusing  is  spiritual 
gin. 

A  writer  capable  of  being  popular  can  only  escape  this 
social  culpability  by  first  of  all  getting  a  profound  sense  that 
literature  is  good-for-nothing  if  it  is  not  admirably  good: 
he  must  detest  bad  literature  too  heartily  to  be  indifferent 
about  producing  it  if  only  other  people  don't  detest  it.  And 
if  he  has  this  sign  of  the  divine  afflatus  within  him,  he  must 
make  up  his  mind  that  he  must  not  pursue  authorship  as  a 
vocation  with  a  trading  determination  to  get  rich  by  it:'  It 
is  in  the  highest  sense  lawful  for  him  to  get  as  good  a  price 
as  he  honorably  can  for  the  best  work  he  is  capable  of; 
but  not  for  him  to  force  or  hurry  his  production,  or  even  do 
over  again  what  has  already  been  done,  either  by  himself  or 
others,  so  as  to  render  his  work  no  real  contribution,  for  the 
sake  of  bringing  up  his  income  to  the  fancy  pitch.  An 
author  who  would  keep  a  pure  and  noble  conscience,  and 
with  that  a  developing  instead  of  degenerating  intellect  and 
taste,  must  cast  out  of  his  aims  the  aim  to  be  rich.  And, 
therefore,  he  must  keep  his  expenditure  low — he  must  make 
for  himself  no  dire  necessity  to  earn  sums  in  order  to  pay 
bills. 

In  opposition  to  this,  it  is  common  to  cite  Walter  Scott's 
case  and  cry,  "  Would  the  world  have  got  as  much  innocent 
(and  therefore  salutary)  pleasure  out  of  Scott,  if  he  had  not 
brought  himself  under  the  pressure  of  money-need?"  I 
think  it  would — and  more;  but  since  it  is  impossible  to 
prove  what  would  have  been,  I  confine  myself  to  replying 
that  Scott  was  not  justified  in  bringing  himself  into  a  posi- 
tion where  severe  consequences  to  others  depended  on  his 
retaining  or  not  retaining  his  mental  competence.  Still  less 
is  Scott  to  be  taken  as  an  example  to  be  followed  in  this 
matter,  even  if  it  were  admitted  that  money-need  served  to 
press  at  once  the  best  and  the  most  work  out  of  him ;  any 
more  than  a  great  navigator  who  has  brought  his  ship  to 
port  in  spite  of  having  taken  a  wrong  and  perilous  route,  is 


LEAVES  FROM  A  NOTE-BOOK. 


199 


to  be  followed  as  to  his  route  by  navigators  who  are  not 
yet  ascertained  to  be  great. 

But  after  the  restraints  and  rules  which  must  guide  the 
acknowledged  author,  whose  power  of  making  a  real  con- 
tribution is  ascertained,  comes  the  consideration,  how  or  on 
what  principle  are  we  to  find  a  check  for  that  troublesome 
disposition  to  authorship  arising  from  the  spread  of  what  is 
called  Education,  which  turns  a  growing  rush  of  vanity  and 
ambition  into  this  current?  The  well-taught,  an  increasing 
number,  are  almost  all  able  to  write  essays  on  given  themes, 
which  demand  new  periodicals  to  save  them  from  lying  in 
cold  obstruction.  The  ill-taught — also  an  increasing  number 
— read  many  books,  seem  to  themselves  to  be  able  to  write 
others  surprisingly  like  what  they  read,  and  probably  superior, 
since  the  variations  are  such  as  please  their  own  fancy,  and 
such  as  they  would  have  recommended  to  their  favorite 
authors :  these  ill-taught  persons  are  perhaps  idle  and  want 
to  give  themselves  "an  object ;"  or  they  are  short  of  money, 
and  feel  disinclined  to  get  it  by  a  commoner  kind  of  work ; 
or  they  find  a  facility  in  putting  sentences  together  which 
gives  them  more  than  a  suspicion  that  they  have  genius, 
which,  if  not  very  cordially  believed  in  by  private  confidants, 
will  be  recognized  by  an  impartial  public ;  or,  finally,  they 
observe  that  writing  is  sometimes  well  paid,  and  sometimes 
a  ground  of  fame  or  distinction,  and  without  any  use  of 
punctilious  logic,  they  conclude  to  become  writers  them- 
selves. 

As  to  these  ill-taught  persons,  whatever  medicines  of  a 
spiritual  sort  can  be  found  good  against  mental  emptiness 
and  inflation — such  medicines  are  needful  for  them.  The 
contempt  of  the  world  for  their  productions  only  comes  after 
their  disease  has  wrought  its  worst  effects.  But  what  is  to 
be  said  to  the  well-taught,  who  have  such  an  alarming 
equality  in  their  power  of  writing  "  like  a  scholar  and  a  gen- 
tleman ?  "  Perhaps  they,  too,  can  only  be  cured  by  the 
medicine  of  higher  ideals  in  social  duty,  and  by  a  fuller  repre- 
sentation to  themselves  of  the  processes  by  which  the  gen- 
eral culture  is  furthered  or  impeded. 


2CO 


LEAVES  FROM  A  NOTE^BOOK, 


Judgments  on  Authors. 

In  endeavoring  to  estimate  a  remarkable  writer  who 
aimed  at  more  than  temporary  influence,  we  have  first  to 
consider  what  was  his  individual  contribution  to  the  spiritual 
wealth  of  mankind?  Had  he  anew  conception?  Did  he 
animate  long-known  but  neglected  truths  with  new  vigor,  and 
cast  fresh  light  on  their  relation  to  other  admitted  truths? 
Did  he  impregnate  any  ideas  with  a  fresh  store  of  emotion, 
and  in  this  way  enlarge  the  area  of  moral  sentiment?  Did 
he,  by  a  wise  emphasis  here,  and  a  wise  disregard  there,  give 
a  more  useful  or  beautiful  proportion  to  aims  or  motives? 
And  even  where  his  thinking  was  most  mixed  with  the  sort 
of  mistake  which  is  obvious  to  the  majority,  as  well  as  that 
which  can  only  be  discerned  by  the  instructed,  or  made 
manifest  by  the  progress  of  things,  has  it  that  salt  of  a  rtoble 
enthusiasm  which  should  rebuke  our  critical  discrimination 
if  its  correctness  is  inspired  with  a  less  admirable  habit  of 
feeling? 

This  is  not  the  common  or  easy  course  to  take  in  estimat- 
ing a  modern  writer.  It  requires  considerable  knowledge 
of  what  he  has  himself  done,  as  well  as  of  what  others  had 
done  before  him,  or  what  they  were  doing  contemporane- 
ously; it  requires  deliberate  reflection  as  to  the  degree  in 
which  our  own  prejudices  may  hinder  us  from  appreciating 
the  intellectual  or  moral  bearing  of  what,  on  a  first  view, 
offends  us.  An  easier  course  is  to  notice  some  salient  mis- 
takes, and  take  them  as  decisive  of  the  writer's  incompetence ; 
or  to  find  out  that  something  apparently  much  the  same 
as  what  he  has  said  in  some  connection  not  clearly  ascer- 
tained had  been  said  by  somebody  else,  though  without 
great  effect,  until  this  new  effect  of  discrediting  the  other's 
originality  had  shown  itself  as  an  adequate  final  cause ;  or 
to  pronounce  from  the  point  of  view  of  individual  taste  that 
this  writer  for  whom  regard  is  claimed  is  repulsive,  weari- 
some, not  to  be  borne,  except  by  those  dull  persons  who  are 
of  a  different  opinion. 

Elder  writers  who  have  passed  Into  classics  were  doubt- 
less treated  in  this  easy  way  when  they  were  still  under  the 
misfortune  of  being  recent — nay,  are  still  dismissed  with  the 
same  rapidity  of  judgment  by  daring  ignorance.  But  people 
who  think  that  they  have  a  reputation  to  lose  in  the  mattev 


LEAVES  EROM  A  NOTE-BOOK. 


20  i 


of  knowledge,  have  looked  into  cyclopaedias  and  histories  of 
philosophy  or  literature,  and  possessed  themselves  of  the  duly 
balanced  epithets  concerning  the  immortals.  They  are  not 
left  to  their  own  unguided  rashness,  or  their  own  unguided 
pusillanimity.  And  it  is  this  sheep-like  flock  who  have  no 
direct  impressions,  no  spontaneous  delight,  no  genuine 
objection  or  self-confessed  neutrality  in  relation  to  the  writers 
become  classic — it  is  these  who  are  incapable  of  passing  a 
genuine  judgment  on  the  living.  Necessarily.  The  suscep- 
tibility they  have  kept  active  is  a  susceptibility  to  their  own 
reputation  for  passing  the  right  judgment,  not  the  suscepti- 
bility to  qualities  in  the  object  of  judgment.  Who  learns  to 
discriminate  shades  of  color  by  considering  what  is  expected 
of  him?  The  habit  of  expressing  borrowed  judgments  stu- 
pefies the  sensibilities,  which  are  the  only  foundation  of  genu- 
ine judgments,  just  as  the  constant  reading  and  retailing  of 
results  from  other  men's  observations  through  the  micro- 
scope, without  ever  looking  through  the  lens  one's  self,  is  an 
instruction  in  some  truths  and  some  prejudices,  but  is  no 
instruction  in  observant  susceptibility ;  on  the  contrary,  it 
breeds  a  habit  of  Inward  seeing  according  to  verbal  state- 
ment, which  dulls  the  power  of  outward  seeing  according  to 
visual  evidence. 

On  this  subject,  as  on  so  many  others,  it  is  difficult  to  strike 
the  balance  between  the  educational  needs  of  passivity  or 
receptivity,  and  Independent  selection.  We  should  learn 
nothing  without  the  tendency  to  Implicit  acceptance;  but 
there  must  clearly  be  a  limit  to  such  mental  submission,  else 
we  should  come  to  a  standstill.  The  human  mind  would 
be  no  better  than  a  dried  specimen,  representing  an 
unchangeable  type.  When  the  assimilation  of  new  matter 
ceases,  decay  must  begin.  In  a  reasoned  self-restraining 
deference  there  is  as  much  energy  as  in  rebellion ;  but 
among  the  less  capable,  one  must  admit  that  the  superior 
energy  is  on  the  side  of  the  rebels.  And  certainly  a  man 
who  dares  to  say  that  he  finds  an  eminent  classic  feeble  here, 
extravagant  there,  and  in  general  overrated,  may  chance  to 
give  an  opinion  which  has  some  genuine  discrimination  in  it 
concerning  a  new  work  or  a  living  thinker — an  opinion  such 
as  can  hardly  ever  be  got  from  the  reputed  judge,  who  is  a 
correct  echo  of  the  most  approved  phrases  concerning  those 
who  have  been  already  canonized. 


202 


LEAVES  FROM  A  NOTE-BOOK. 


Story-Telling. 

What  is  the  best  way  of  telling  a  story?  Since  the 
standard  must  be  the  interest  of  the  audience,  there  must  be 
several  or  many  good  ways  rather  than  one  best.  For  we 
get  interested  in  the  stories  life  presents  to  us  through  divers 
orders  and  modes  of  presentation.  Very  commonly  our 
first  awakening  to  a  desire  of  knowing  a  man's  past  or  future 
comes  from  our  seeing  him  as  a  stranger  in  some  unusual  or 
pathetic  or  humorous  situation,  or  manifesting  some  remark- 
able characteristics.  We  make  inquiries  in  consequence,  or 
we  become  observant  and  attentive  whenever  opportunities 
of  knowing  more  may  happen  to  present  themselves  without 
our  search.  You  have  seen  a  refined  face  among  the  pris- 
oners picking  tow  in  jail ;  you  afterwards  see  the  same  unfor- 
getable  face  in  a  pulpit :  he  must  be  of  dull  fibre  who  would 
not  care  to  know  more  about  a  life  which  showed  such  con- 
trasts, though  he  might  gather  his  knowledge  in  a  fragmen- 
tary and  unchronological  way. 

Again,  we  have  heard  much,  or  at  least  something  not 
quite  common,  about  a  man  whom  we  have  never  seen,  and 
hence  we  look  round  with  curiosity  when  we  are  told  that 
he  is  present ;  whatever  he  says  or  does  before  us  is  charged 
with  a  meaning  due  to  our  previous  hearsay  knowledge 
about  him,  gathered  either  from  dialogue  of  which  he  was 
expressly  and  emphatically  the  subject,  or  from  incidental 
remark,  or  from  general  report  either  in  or  out  of  print. 

These  indirect  ways  of  arriving  at  knowledge  are  always 
the  most  stirring  even  in  relation  to  impersonal  subjects.  To 
see  a  chemical  experiment  gives  an  attractiveness  to  a 
definition  of  chemistry,  and  fills  it  with  a  significance  which 
it  would  never  have  had  without  the  pleasant  shock  of  an 
unusual  sequence,  such  as  the  transformation  of  a  solid  into 
gas,  and  vice  versa.  To  see  a  word  for  the  first  time  either 
as  substantive  or  adjective  in  a  connection  where  we  care 
about  knowing  its  complete  meaning,  is  the  way  to  vivify 
its  meaning  in  our  recollection.  Curiosity  becomes  the  more 
eager  from  the  incompleteness  of  the  first  information. 
Moreover,  it  is  in  this  way  that  memory  works  in  its  inci- 
dental revival  of  events :  some  salient  experience  appears  in 
inward  vision,  and  in  consequence  the  antecedent  facts  are 
retraced  from  what  is  regarded  as  the  beginning  of  the  epi- 


LEAVES  FROM  A  NOTE-BOOK. 


203 


sode  in  which  that  experience  made  a  more  or  less  strikingly 
memorable  part.  "Ah!  I  remember  addressing  the  mob 
from  the  hustings  at  Westminster — -you  wouldn't  have 
thought  that  I  could  ever  have  been  in  such  a  position. 

Well,  how  I  came  there  was  in  this  way  ; "  and  then 

follows  a  retrospective  narration. 

The  modes  of  telling  a  story  founded  on  these  processes 
of  outward  and  inward  life  derive  their  effectiveness  from 
the  superior  mastery  of  images  and  pictures  in  grasping  the 
attention — or,  one  might  say  with  more  fundamental  accur- 
acy, from  the  fact  that  our  earliest,  strongest  impressions, 
our  most  intimate  convictions,  are  simply  images  added  to 
more  or  less  of  sensation.  These  are  the  primitive  instru- 
ments of  thought.  Hence  it  is  not  surprising  that  early 
poetry  took  this  way — •telling  a  daring  deed,  a  glorious 
achievement,  without  caring  for  what  went  before.  The 
desire  for  orderly  narration  is  a  later,  more  reflective  birth. 
The  presence  of  the  Jack  in  the  box  affects  every  child :  it 
is  the  more  reflective  lad,  the  miniature  philosopher,  who 
wants  to  know  how  he  got  there. 

The  only  stories  life  presents  to  us  in  an  orderly  way  are 
those  of  our  autobiography,  or  the  career  of  our  companions 
from  our  childhood  upwards,  or  perhaps  of  our  own  children. 
But  it  is  a  great  art  to  make  a  connected,  strictly  relevant 
narrative  of  such  careers  as  we  can  recount  from  the  begin- 
ning. In  these  cases  the  sequence  of  associations  is  almost 
sure  to  overmaster  the  sense  of  proportion.  Such  narratives 
ab  ovo  are  summer's-day  stories  for  happy  loungers ;  not  the 
cup  of  self-forgetting  excitement  to  the  busy  who  can  snatch 
an  hour  of  entertainment. 

But  the  simple  opening  of  a  story  with  a  date  and  neces- 
sary account  of  places  and  people,  passing  on  quietly  towards 
the  more  rousing  elements  of  narrative  and  dramatic  presen- 
tation, without  need  of'retrospect,  has  its  advantages,  which 
have  to  be  measured  bythe  nature  of  the  story.  Spirited 
narrative,  without  more  than  a  touch  of  dialogue  here  and 
there,  may  be  made  eminently  interesting,  and  is  suited  to 
the  novelette.  Examples  of  its  charm  are  seen  in  the  short 
tales  in  which  the  French  have  a  mastery  never  reached  by 
the  English,  who  usually  demand  coarser  flavors  than  are 
given  by  that  delightful  gayety  which  is  well  described  by 


z64  LEA  VES  PR  OM  A  NO  TE-B  O  OK. 

La  Fontaine*  as  not  anything  that  provokes  fits  of  laughter, 
but  a  certain  charm,  an  agreeable  mode  of  handling,  whicb 
lends  attractiveness  to  all  subjects  even  the  most  serious. 
And  it  is  this  sort  of  gayety  which  plays  around  the  best 
French  novelettes.  But  the  opening  chapters  of  the  Vicar 
of  Wakefield"  are  as  fine  as  anything  that  can  be  done  in 
this  way. 

Why  should  a  story  not  be  told  in  the  most  irregular 
fashion  that  an  author's  idiosyn  crasy  may  prompt,  provided 
that  he  gives  us  what  we  can  enjoy?  The  objections  to 
Sterne's  wild  way  of  telling  "Tristram  Shandy  "  lie  more 
solidly  in  the  quality  of  the  interrupting  matter  than  in  the 
fact  of  interruption.  The  dear  public  would  do  well  to  reflect 
that  they  are  often  bored  from  the  want  of  flexibility  in  their 
own  minds.    They  are  like  the  topers  of  *'one  liquor." 


Historic  Imagination. 

The  exercise  of  a  veracious  imagination  in  historical 
picturing  seems  to  be  capable  of  a  development  that  might 
help  the  judgment  greatly  with  regard  to  present  and  future 
events.  By  veracious  imagination,  I  mean  the  working  out 
in  detail  of  the ,  various  steps  by  which  a  political  or  social 
change  was  reached,  using  all  extant  evidence,  and  supply- 
ing deficiencies  by  careful  analogical  creation.  How  triumph- 
ant opinions  originally  spread ;  how  institutions  arose ; 
what  were  the  conditions  of  great  inventions,  discoveries,  or 
theoretic  conceptions ;  what  circumstances  affecting  individ- 
ual lots  are  attendant  on  the  decay  of  long-established 
systems — all  these  grand  elements  of  history  require  the 
illumination  of  special  imaginative  treatment.  But  effective 
truth  in  this  application  of  art  requires  freedom  from  the 
vulgar  coercion  of  conventional  plot,  which  is  become  hardly 
of  higher  influence  on  imaginative  representation  than  a 
detailed  "order"  for  a  picture  sent  by  a  rich  grocer  to  an 
eminent  painter — allotting  a  certain  portion  of  the  canvas  to 
a  rural  scene,  another  to  a  fashionable  group,  with  a  request 

*  "Je  n'appelle  pas  gayete  ce  qui  excite  le  rire,  mais  un  certain 
charme,  un  air  agreable  qu'on  peut  donner  a  toutes  sortes  de  sujets, 
mesme  les  plus  serieux." — Preface  to  Fables. 


LEA  VES  FROM  A  NO  TE-BOOK, 


205 


for  a  murder  in  the  middle  distance,  and  a  little  comedy  to 
relieve  it.  A  slight  approximation  to  the  veracious  glimpses 
of  history  artistically  presented,  which  I  am  indicating,  but 
applied  only  to  an  incident  of  contemporary  Hfe,  is  "Un 
Paquet  de  Lettres"  by  Gustave  Droz.  For  want  of  such 
real,  minute  vision  of  how  changes  come  about  in  the  past, 
we  fall  into  ridiculously  inconsistent  estimates  of  actual 
movements,  condemning;  in,  the  present  what  we  belaud  in 
the  past,  and  pronouncing  impossible  processes  that  have 
been  repeated  again  and  again  in  the  historical  preparation 
of  the  very  system  under  which  we  live.  A  false  kind  of 
idealization  dulls,  our  perception  of  the  meaning  in  words 
when  they  relate  to  past  events  which  have  had  a  glorious 
issue;  for  lack  of  comparison  no  warning  image  rises  to 
check  scorn  of  the  very  phrases  which  in  other  associations 
are  consecrated. 

Utopian  pictures  help  the  reception  of  ideas  as  to  con- 
structive results,  but  hardly  so  much  as  a  vivid  presentation 
of  how  results  have  been  actually  brought  about,  especially 
in  religious  and  social  change.  And  there  is  the  pathos, 
the  heroism,  often  accompanying  the  decay  and  final  struggle 
of  old  systems,  which  has  not  had  its  share  of  tragic 
commemoration.  What  really  took  place  in  and  around 
Constantine  before,  upon,  and  immediately  after  his  declared 
conversion?  Could  a  momentary  flash  be  thrown  on 
Eusebius  in  his  sayings  and  doings  as  an  ordinary  man  in 
bishop's  garments?  Or  on  Julian  and  Libanius?  There 
has  been  abundant  writing  on  such  great  turning-points, 
but  not  such  as  serves  to  instruct  the  imagination  in  true 
comparison.  I  want  something  different  from  the  abstract 
treatment  which  belongs  to  grave  history  from  a  doctrinal 
point  of  view,  and  something  different  from  the  schemed 
picuresqueness  of  ordinary  historical  fiction.  I  want  brief, 
severely  conscientious  reproductions  in  their  concrete  inci- 
dents, of  pregnant  movements*  in  the  past. 


Value  in  Originality, 


The  supremacy  given  in  European  cultures  to  the  litera- 
tures of  Greece  and  Rome  has  had  an  effect  almost  equal  to 


2o6 


LEAVES  FROM  A  NOTE-BOOK. 


that  of  a  common  religion  in  binding  the  Western  nations 
together.  It  is  foolish  to  be  forever  complaining  of  the  con- 
sequent uniformity,  as  if  there  were  an  endless  power  of 
originality  in  the  human  mind.  Great  and  precious  origina- 
tion must  always  be  comparatively  rare,  and  can  only  exist 
on  condition  of  a  wide,  massive  uniformity.  When  a  multi^ 
tude  of  men  have  learned  to  use  the  same  language  in  speech 
and  writing,  then  and  then  only  can  the  greatest  masters  of 
language  arise.  For  in  what  does  their  mastery  consist? 
.They  use  words  which  are  already  a  familiar  medium  of 
understanding  and  sympathy  in  such  a  way  as  greatly  to 
enlarge  the  understanding  and  sympathy.  Originality  of 
this  order  changes  the  wild  grasses  into  world-feeding  grain: 
Idiosyncrasies  are  pepper  and  spices  of  questionable  aroma. 


To  the  Prosaic  all  Things  are  Prosaic. 

"Is  the  time  we  live  in  prosaic?"  <<That  depends:  it 
must  certainly  be  prosaic  to  one  whose  mind  takes  a  prosaic 
stand  in  contemplating  it."  ''But  it  is  precisely  the  most 
poetic  minds  that  most  groan  over  the  vulgarity  of  the  pres- 
ent, its  degenerate  sensibility  to  beauty,  eagerness  for  mater- 
ialistic explanation,  noisy  triviality."  "Perhaps  they  would 
have  had  the  same  complaint  to  make  about  the  age  of 
Elizabeth,  if,  living  then,  they  had  fixed  their  attention  on 
its  more  sordid  elements,  or  had  been  subject  to  the  grating 
influence  of  its  every-day  meanness,  and  had  sought  refuge 
from  them  in  the  contemplation  of  whatever  suited  their  taste 
in  a  former  age." 


''Dear  Reli^ous  Love!' 

We  get  our  knowledge  of  perfect  Love  by  glimpses  and  in 
fragments  chiefly — the  rarest  only  among  us  knowing  what 
it  is  to  worship  and  caress,  reverence  and  cherish,  divide  our 
bread  and  mingle  our  thoughts  at  one  and  the  same  time, 
under  inspiration  of  the  same  object.  Finest  aromas  will  so 
often  leave  the  fruits  to  which  they  are  native  and  cling  else- 
where^ leaving  the  fruit  empty  of  all  but  its  coarser  structure! 


LEAVES  FROM  A  NOTE-BOOK. 


207 


We  Make  our  Own  Precedents, 

In  the  times  of  national  mixture  when  modern  Europe 
was,  as  one  may  say,  a-brewing,  it  was  open  to  a  man  who 
did  not  like  to  be  judged  by  the  Roman  law  to  choose  which 
of  certain  other  codes  he  would  be  tried  by.  So,  in  our 
own  times,  they  who  openly  adopt  a  higher  rule  than  their 
neighbors  do  thereby  make  act  of  choice  as  to  the  laws  and 
precedents  by  which  they  shall  be  approved  or  condemned, 
and  thus  it  may  happen  that  we  see  a  man  morally  pilloried 
for  a  very  customary  deed,  and  yet  having  no  right  to  com- 
plain, inasmuch  as  in  his  foregoing  deliberative  course  of  life- 
he  had  referred  himself  to  the  tribunal  of  those  higher  con- 
ceptions, before  which  such  a  deed  is  without  question  con- 
demnable. 


Birth  of  Tolerance. 

Tolerance  first  comes  through  equality  of  struggle,  as  in 
the  case  of  Arianism  and  Catholicism  in  the  early  times — 
Valens,  Eastern  and  Arian,  Valentinian,  Western  and 
Catholic,  alike  publishing  edicts  of  tolerance;  or  it  comes 
from  a  common  need  of  relief  from  an  oppressive  predomi- 
nance, as  when  James  11.  published  his  Act  of  Tolerance 
towards  non-Anglicans,  being  forced  into  liberality  towards 
the  Dissenters  by  the  need  to  get  it  for  the  Catholics.  Com- 
munity of  interest  is  the  root  of  justice;  community  of  suffer- 
ing, the  root  of  pity;  community  of  joy,  the  root  of  love. 


Enveloped  in  a  common  mist,  we  seem  to  walk  in  clear- 
ness ourselves,  and  behold  only  the  mist  that  enshrouds 
others. 


Sympathetic  people  are  often  incommunicative  about 
themselves :  they  give  back  reflected  images  which  hide  their 
own  depths. 


268 


LEAVES  FROM  A  NOTE-BOOK. 


The  pond  said  to  the  ocean,  "  Why  do  you  rage  so  ?  The 
wind  is  not  so  very  violent — nay,  it  is  already  fallen.  Look 
at  me.  I  rose  into  no  foaming  waves,  and  am  already 
smooth  again.'* 


Felix  qui  non  potuit. 

Many  feel  themselves  very  confidently  on  safe  ground 
when  they  say  :  It  must  be  good  for  man  to  know  the  Truth. 
But  it  is  clearly  not  good  for  a  particular  man  to  know  some 
particular  truth,  as  irremediable  treachery  in  one  whom  he 
cherishes — better  that  he  should  die  without  knowing  it. 

Of  scientific  truth,  it  is  not  conceivable  that  some  facts  as 
to  the  tendency  of  things  affecting  the  final  destination  of 
the  race  might  be  more  hurtful  when  they  had  entered  into 
the  human  consciousness  than  they  would  have  been  if  they 
had  remained  purely  external  in  their  activity  ? 


Divine  Grace  a  Real  Emanation. 

There  is  no  such  thing  as  an  impotent  or  neutral  deity,  if 
the  deity  be  really  believed  in,  and  contemplated,  either  in 
prayer  or  meditation.  Every  object  of  thought  reacts  on 
the  mind  that  conceives  it,  still  more  on  that  which  habitually 
contemplates  it.  In  this  we  may  be  said  to  solicit  help 
from  a  generalization  or  abstraction.  Wordsworth  had  this 
truth  in  his  consciousness  when  he  wrote  (in  the  Prelude): 

"  Nor  general  truths,  which  are  themselves  a  sort 
Of  elements  and  agents,  Under-powers, 
Subordinate  helpers  of  the  hving  mind" — 

not  indeed  precisely  in  the  same  relation,  but  with  a  mean- 
ing which  involves  that  wider  moral  influence. 


^'A  Fine  Excess!'    Feeling  is  Energy, 

One  can  hardly  insist  too  much,  in  the  present  stage  of 
thinking,  on  the  efficacy  of  feeHng  in  stimulating  to  ardent 


LEAVES  FROM  A  NOTE-BOOK. 


co-operation,  quite  apart  from  the  conviction  that  such  co 
operation  is  needed  for  the  achievement  of  the  end  in  view. 
Just  as  hatred  will  vent  itself  in  private  curses  no  longer 
believed  to  have  any  potency,  and  joy,  in  private  singing  far 
out  among  the  woods  and  fields,  so  sympathetic  feeling  can 
only  be  satisfied  by  joining  in  the  action  which  expresses  it, 
though  the  added  "  Bravo ! "  the  added  push,  the  added  penny, 
is  no  more  than  a  grain  of  dust  on  a  rolling  mass.  When  stu- 
dents take  the  horses  out  of  a  political  hero's  carriage,  and 
draw  him  home  by  the  force  of  their  own  muscle,  the  strug- 
gle in  each  is  simply  to  draw  or  push,  without  consideration 
whether  his  place  would  not  be  as  well  filled  by  somebody 
else,  or  whether  his  one  arm  be  really  needful  to  the  effect. 
It  is  under  the  same  inspiration  that  abundant  help  rushes 
towards  the  scene  of  a  fire,  rescuing  imperilled  lives,  and 
laboring  with  generous  rivalry  in  carrying  buckets.  So  the 
'old  blind  King  John  of  Bohemia  at  the  battle  of  Crecy 
begged  his  vassals  to  lead  him  into  the  fight  that  he  might 
strike  a  good  blow,  though  his  own  stroke,  possibly  fatal  to 
himself,  could  not  turn  by  a  hair's-breadth  the  imperious 
course  of  victory. 

The  question,  *'Of  what  use  is  it  for  me  to  work  towards 
an  end  confessedly  good  ?"  comes  from  that  sapless  kind  of 
reasoning  which  is  falsely  taken  for  a  sign  of  supreme  men- 
tal activity,  but  is  really  due  to  languor,  or  incapability  of 
that  mental  grasp  which  makes  objects  strongly  present, 
and  to  a  lack  of  sympathetic  emotion.  In  the  "Spanish 
Gypsy"  Fedalma  says — 

"The  grandest  death  !  to  die  in  vain — for  Love 
Greater  than  sways  the  forces  of  the  world  * '  ^ — 

referring  to  the  image  of  the  disciples  throwing  themselves, 
consciously  in  vain,  on  the  Roman  spears.  I  really  believe 
and  mean  this — not  as  a  rule  of  general  action,  but  as  a  pos- 
sible grand  instance  of  determining  energy  in  human  sym- 
pathy, which  even  in  particular  cases,  where  it  has  only  a 
magnificent  futility,  is  more  adorable,  or  as  w^e  say  divine, 
^  than  unpitying  force,  or  than  a  prudent  calculation  of  results. 
Perhaps  it  is  an  implicit  joy  in  the  resources  of  our  human 
nature  which  has  stimulated  admiration  for  acts  of  self-sacri- 

*  V.  what  Demosthenes  says  ("  De  Corona  ")  about  Athens  pursu- 
ing the  same  course,  though  she  had  known  from  the  beginning  that 
h?r  heroic  resistance  would  be  in  vain. 


2IO 


LEAVES  FROM  A  NOTE-BOOK. 


fice  which  are  vain  as  to  their  immediate  end.  Marcus  Cur- 
tius  was  probably  not  imagined  as  concluding  to  himself  that 
he  and  his  horse  would  so  fill  up  the  gap  as  to  make  a 
smooth  terra  firma.  The  impulse  and  act  made  the  heroism, 
not  the  correctness  of  adaptation.  No  doubt  the  passionate 
inspiration  which  prompts  and  sustains  a/ course  of  self-sac- 
rificing labor  in  the  light  of  soberly  estimated  results  gathers 
the  highest  title  to  our  veneration,  and  makes  the  supreme 
heroism.  But  the  generous  leap  of  impulse  is  needed  too, 
to  swell  the  flood  of  sympathy  in  us  beholders,  that  we  may 
not  fall  completely  under  the  mastery  of  calculation,  which 
in  its  turn  may  fail  of  ends  for  want  of  energy  got  from 
ardor.  We  have  need  to  keep  the  sluices  open  for  possible 
influxes  of  the  rarer  sort. 


TH£  Em 


TWO LOVERS.


TWO lovers by a moss-grown spring:
They leaned soft cheeks together there,
Mingled the dark and sunny hair,
And heard the wooing thrushes sing.
⁠⁠⁠O budding time!
⁠⁠⁠O love's blest prime!


Two wedded from the portal stept:
The bells made happy carollings,
The air was soft as fanning wings,
White petals on the pathway slept.
⁠⁠⁠O pure-eyed bride!
⁠⁠⁠O tender pride!


Two faces o'er a cradle bent:
Two hands above the head were locked:
These pressed each other while they rocked,
Those watched a life that love had sent.
⁠⁠⁠O solemn hour!
⁠⁠⁠O hidden power!


Two parents by the evening fire:
The red light fell about their knees
On heads that rose by slow degrees
Like buds upon the lily spire.
⁠⁠⁠O patient life!
⁠⁠⁠O tender strife!


The poems of George Eliot 1884 plate facing p428.png

"Two lovers by a moss-grown spring."


The two still sat together there,
The red light shone about their knees;
But all the heads by slow degrees
Had gone and left that lonely pair.
⁠⁠⁠O voyage fast!
⁠⁠⁠O vanished past!


The red light shone upon the floor
And made the space between them wide;
They drew their chairs up side by side,
Their pale cheeks joined, and said, "Once more!"
⁠⁠⁠O memories!
⁠⁠⁠O past that is!


1866.


